#1 BESTSELLER
TWO MILLION COPIES SOLD
Why Some Companies
Make the Leap...
and Others Don't
GOOD TO
I
SAVED UP TO 80
ON THIS TEXTBOO
Powered by
ookRenter.
A
COLLINS
>r of the bestsellinq
r TO LAST
USA $27.50
CANADA $34.75
THE CHALLENGE
Built to Last, the defining management study of the
nineties, showed how great companies triumph over
time and how long-term sustained performance can be
engineered into the DNA of an enterprise from the very
beginning.
But what about the company that is not born with
great DNA? How can good companies, mediocre compa
nies, even bad companies achieve enduring greatness?
THE STUDY
For years, this guestion preyed on the mind of Jim
Collins. Are there companies that defy gravity and con
vert long-term mediocrity or worse into long-term
superiority? And if so, what are the universal distin
guishing characteristics that cause a company to go
from good to great?
THE STANDARDS
Using tough benchmarks, Collins and his research team
identified a set of elite companies that made the leap
to great results and sustained those results for at least
fifteen years. How great? After the leap, the good-togreat
companies generated cumulative stock returns
that beat the general stock market by an average of
seven times in fifteen years, better than twice the
results delivered by a composite index of the world's
greatest companies, including Coca-Cola, Intel, General
Electric, and Merck.
THE COMPARISONS
The research team contrasted the good-to-great
companies with a carefully selected set of comparison
companies that failed to make the leap from good to
great. What was different? Why did one set of compa
nies become truly great performers while the other set
remained only good?
Over five years, the team analyzed the histories of
all twenty-eight companies in the study. After sifting
through mountains of data and thousands of pages of
interviews, Collins and his crew discovered the key
determinants of greatnesswhy some companies make
the leap and others don't.
(continued on back flap) 1001
GOOD TO GREAT
A L SO BY JIM CO L L IN S
Built to hast
(with Jerry I. Porras)
m mi ;n* #* &
, ,' K >M?,
Iff ;i*k1
&'*" si: -A
viV' *"
G ^M^y * 1$$
Why Some Companies
Make the Leap . . .
and Others Don't
C Collins
An Imprint of HarperCollinsPubl/shers
good to great. Copyright  2001 by JimCollins. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book
maybe usedor reproduced in anymannerwhatsoever without written
permission exceptin the case of briefquotations embodied in
critical articles and reviews. For information address
HarperCollins Publishers Inc., 10East53rd Street,New York,NY 10022.
HarperCollins booksmaybe purchased for educational, business, or sales
promotional use. For information please write:
Special Markets Department, HarperCollins Publishers Inc.,
10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022.
Designed by Jo AnneMetsch
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Collins, JamesC. (James Charles), 1958-
Good to great: whysomecompanies makethe leap ... and others
don't / Jim Collins. 1sted.
p. cm.
Includesbibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-06-662099-6 (he)
1. Leadership. 2. Strategic planning. 3. Organizational
change. 4. Technological innovationsManagement. I. Title
HD57.7.C645 2001
658-dc21 2001024818
07 08 09 RRD 90 89 88 87 86
This book is dedicated to the Chimps
I love you all, each and every one.
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments ix
Preface xiii
1: Good Is the Enemy of Great 1
2: Level 5 Leadership 17
3: First Who ... Then What 41
4: Confront the Brutal Facts
(Yet Never Lose Faith) 65
5: The Hedgehog Concept
(Simplicity within the Three Circles) 90
6: ACulture of Discipline 120
7: Technology Accelerators J44
8: The Flywheel and the DoomLoop 164
9: From Good to Great to Built to Last J 8 8
epilogue: FrequentlyAsked Questions 211
Research Appendices 219
Notes 261
Index 287
MEMBERS OF THE G O O D-TO - G R E AT RESEARCH TEAM
ASSEMBLED FOR TEAM MEETING, JANUARY 2000
First row: Vicki MosurOsgood, Alyson Sinclair, Stefanie A.
Judd, Christine Jones
Second row: Eric Hagen, Duane C. Duffy, PaulWeissman,
Scott Jones, Weijia (Eve) Li
Third row: Nicholas M.Osgood, Jenni Cooper, Leigh
Wilbanks, Anthony J. Chirikos
Fourth row: BrianJ. Bagley, Jim Collins, Brian C. Larsen,
PeterVan Genderen, Lane Hornung
Notpictured: ScottCederberg, MortenT. Hansen,AmberL.
Young
Photo credit: Jim Collins Collection.
ACKUQ\NLBQM&MTS
ft o say this book is "by Jim Collins" overstates the case. Without the
significantcontributions made by other people, this book would certainly
not exist.
At the top of the list are members of the research team. I was truly
blessed to have an extraordinary group of people dedicated to the project.
In aggregate, they contributed somethingon the order of 15,000 hours of
workto the project, and the standardthey set for themselves in the quality
of their work set a high standard for me to try to live up to. As I struggled
with writing the book, I pictured all the hardworking members of the
team who dedicated months (in some cases, years) to this effort looking
overmyshoulder and holdingme accountable, challengingme to create
a final manuscript that met their standards, worthy of their toil and contri
bution. I hope this effort meets with their approval. Anyfailure to reach
that standard rests entirely with me.
Members of the Research Team for
Good to Great
Brian J. Bagley
Scott Cederberg
Anthony J. Chirikos
Jenni Cooper
Duane C. Duffy
EricHagen
Morten T. Hansen
LaneHornung
Christine Jones
Scott Jones
StefanieA. Judd
Brian C. Larsen
Weijia (Eve) Li
Nicholas M. Osgood
Vicki Mosur Osgood
Alyson Sinclair
Peter Van Genderen
Paul Weissman
Leigh Wilbanks
Amber L. Young
In addition, I would like to thank Denis B. Nock at the University of
Colorado Graduate School of Business, whowas instrumental in helping
me identifyand recruit the very bestgraduatestudents to join the research
x Acknowledgments
team. Getting the right research teammembers on the bus was the single
mostimportant step in making the project successful, and Denis played a
singularly important role in getting a whole busload ofgreat people. Also at
the University of Colorado, I am indebted to Carol Krismann and her ded
icated staff at the William M. White Business Library, who patiently
worked with members of the research team to locate all sorts of arcane
information. In addition to Carol, I would like to acknowledge Betty
Grebe, Lynnette Leiker, Dinah McKay, MarthaJo Sani,and JeanWhelan.
I am particularly indebted to a large number of critical readers who
invested hours in reading drafts ofthe manuscript and feeding methe bru
tal facts aboutwhatneeded to be improved. Yet despite sometimes searing
(and always helpful) feedback, theycontinually reinforced myfaith in the
potential of the project. For their frankness and insight, I would like to
thank Kirk Arnold, R. Wayne Boss, Natalia Cherney-Roca, Paul M.
Cohen, Nicole Toomey Davis, Andrew Fenniman, Christopher Forman,
William C. Garriock, Terry Gold, Ed Greenberg, Martha Greenberg,
Wayne H. Gross, George H. Hagen, Becky Hall,LizHeron,John G.
Hill, Ann H. Judd, Rob Kaufman, Joe Kennedy, Keith Kennedy, Butch
Kerzner, Alan Khazei, Anne Knapp, Betina Koski, Ken Krechmer, Bar
bara B.Lawton, Ph.D., Kyle Lefkoff, Kevin Maney,BillMiller, Joseph P.
Modica, Thomas W. Morris, Robert Mrlik,John T. Myser, Peter Nosier,
Antonia Ozeroff, Jerry Peterson, Jim Reid, James J. Robb, John Rogers,
Kevin Rumon, Heather Reynolds Sagar, Victor Sanvido, Mason D.
Schumacher, Jeffrey L. Seglin, Sina Simantob, Orin Smith, Peter Staudhammer,
Rick Sterling, Ted Stolberg, Jeff Tarr, Jean Taylor, Kim
Hollingsworth Taylor, TomTierney, John Vitale, Dan Wardrop, Mark H.
Willes, DavidL. Witherow, and Anthony R.Yue.
We were very fortunate to have the participation of executives instru
mental in the transformation at the good-to-great companies who
patiently endured our questions during one- to two-hour interviews and,
at times, follow-up conversations. To each of the following people, I
would express my hopes that this book captures the best of what you
accomplished. Truly, you are the unsung heroes of American business:
Robert Aders, William F. Aldinger, III, Richard J. Appert, Charles J.
Aschauer, Jr., Dick Auchter, H. DavidAycock, James D. Bernd, Douglas
M. Bibby, Roger E. Birk, Marc C. Breslawsky, Eli Broad, Dr. Charles S.
Brown, Walter Bruckart, Vernon A. Brunner, James E. Campbell, Fred
Canning, Joseph J. Cisco, Richard Cooley, Michael J. Critelli, Joseph F.
Cullman 3rd, John A. Doherty, Douglas D. Drysdale, Lyle Everingham,
Acknowledgments xi
Meredith B. Fischer, Paul N. Fruitt, Andreas Gembler, Milton L. Glass,
James G. Grosklaus, Jack Grundhofer, George B. Harvey, James Her
ring, James D. Hlavacek, Gene D. Hoffman, J. Timothy Howard,
Charles D. Hunter, F. Kenneth Iverson, James A. Johnson, L. Daniel
Jorndt, Robert L. Joss, Arthur Juergens, William E. Kelvie, Linda K.
Knight, Glenn S. Kraiss, Robert J. Levin, Edmund Wattis Littlefield,
David O. Maxwell, Hamish Maxwell, Ellen Merlo, Hyman Meyers,
Arjay Miller, John N. D. Moody, David Nassef, Frank Newman, Arthur
C. Nielsen, Jr., John D. Ong, Dr. Emanuel M. Papper, Richard D. Par
sons, Derwyn Phillips, Marvin A. Pohlman, William D. Pratt, Fred Pur
due, Michael J. Quigley, George Rathmann, Carl E. Reichardt, Daniel
M. Rexinger, Bill Rivas, Dennis Roney, FrancisC. Rooney, Jr.,Wayne R.
Sanders, Robert A. Schoellhorn, Bernard H. Semler, Samuel Siegel,
Thomas F. Skelly, Joseph P. Stiglich, Joseph F. Turley, Glenn S. Utt Jr.,
Edward Villanueva, Charles R. Walgreen, Jr., Charles R. Walgreen, III,
William H. Webb, George Weissman, Blair White,WilliamWilson, Alan
L. Wurtzel, and William E. Zierden.
Numerous people from the companies in our research were enor
mously helpfulwitharranging interviews and providing uskeydocuments
and information. In particular, I would like to note Catherine Babington,
David A. Baldwin, Ann Fahey-Widman, and Miriam Welty Trangsrud at
AbbottLaboratories; Ann M. Collier at Circuit City;John P. DiQuollo at
Fannie Mae; David A. Fausch and Danielle M. Frizzi at Gillette; Tina
Barry for her assistance at Kimberly-Clark and her insights about Darwin
Smith; Lisa Crouch and Angie McCoyat Kimberly-Clark; JackCornett at
Kroger; Terry S. Lisenby and Cornelia Wells at Nucor; Steven C. Parrish
and Timothy A. Sompolski at Philip Morris; Sheryl Y. Battles and Diana
L. Russo at Pitney Bowes, Thomas L. Mammoserand Laurie L. Meyer at
Walgreens; and Naomi S. Ishida at Wells Fargo.
I would like to give special thanks to Diane Compagno Miller for her
help in opening doors at Wells Fargo, John S. Reedfor his help in open
ing doors at Philip Morris, Sharon L. Wurtzel for her help in opening
doors at Circuit City, Carl M. Brauer for his insights on Circuit City and
generoussharing of his manuscript,James G. Clawsonfor his Circuit City
cases and insights, Karen Lewis for her assistance with Hewlett-Packard
Company Archives, Tracy Russell and her colleagues at The Center for
Research in Security Prices fortheir diligence in ensuringthat wehad the
most current data available, Virginia A. Smith for her helpful guidance,
Nick Sagarforkeybeta, MarvinBressler for his insightand wisdom, Bruce
xii Acknowledgments
Woolpert for helping meto understand the concept of mechanisms (and
for his ongoing support), Ruth Ann Bagley for her diligent proofreading,
Dr. Jeffrey T. Luftig for access to his remarkable brain, Professor William
Briggs for his ability to break a complex problem into useful simplicity,
Admiral Jim Stockdale for his invaluable teaching, Jennifer Futernick for
her inspiration in creating the McKinsey salon that ignited this project,
and Bill Meehanfor the initial spark.
I would like to make special note ofJerry Porras as my research mentor;
James J. Robb as my talented graphics consultant, Peter Ginsberg as my
trusted agent and fellow council member in the publishing world; Lisa
Berkowitz, who makes magic happen; and Adrian Zackheim, who has
enthusiastically believed in and supported this book from the momenthe
learned of it.
Finally, Iamdeeply thankful for my great good fortune tobe married to
Joanne Ernst. After twenty years ofmarriage, she continues to put up with
mysomewhat neurotic nature and propensity to become consumed with
projects suchas this one. Notonly isshemy most helpful critic, but she is
also my deepest and most enduring support. The ultimate definition of
success in life is that your spouse likes and respects you ever more as the
years go by. By that measure, more than any other, I hope to be as suc
cessful as she is.
PREFACE
j|pii|| s j was finishing this manuscript, I wentfor a run up a steep, rocky
trail in Eldorado Springs Canyon, justsouth ofmyhome in Boulder, Col
orado. I had stopped on top at one ofmyfavorite sittingplaces with a view
of the high countrystill covered in its winter coat of snow, when an odd
question popped into my mind: Howmuch would someone have to pay
me notto publish Good to Great?
It was an interesting thought experiment, given that I'd just spent the
previous five years working on the research project and writing this book.
Not that there isn't some number that might entice me to bury it, but by
the time I crossed the hundred-million-dollar threshold, it was time to
head back down the trail. Even that much couldn't convince me to aban
don the project. I am a teacher at heart.As such, it is impossible forme to
imagine not sharingwhat we've learned with students around the world.
And it is in the spiritof learningand teaching that I bring forth this work.
After many months of hiding away like a hermit in what I call monk
mode,I would very much enjoyhearingfrom peopleabout whatworks for
them and what doesnot. I hope youwill find much ofvalue in these pages
and will commit to applying whatyou learn to whatever you do, if not to
your company, then to your social sector work, and if not there, then at
least to your own life.
Jim Collins
jimcollins@aol.com
www.jimcollins.com
Boulder, Colorado
March 27, 2001
GOOD TO GREAT
C H A P T E R
That's what makes death so hardunsatisfied curiosity.
Beryl Markham,
West with the Night1
^ifi^ood is the enemy of great.
And that is one of the key reasons why we have so little that becomes
great.
Wedon't have greatschools, principally because wehavegoodschools.
We don't have great government, principally becausewe have good gov
ernment. Few people attain great lives, in large part because it is just so
easy to settle fora goodlife.The vast majority ofcompanies never become
great, precisely because the vast majority become quite goodand that is
their main problem.
This point became piercingly clear to me in 1996, when I was having
dinner with a group of thought leaders gathered for a discussion about
organizational performance. Bill Meehan, the managing director of the
San Francisco office of McKinsey& Company, leaned over and casually
confided, "You know, Jim, we love Built to Last around here. You and
your coauthor did a very fine job on the research and writing. Unfortu
nately, it's useless."
Curious, I askedhim to explain.
"The companies you wrote about were,for the most part, always great,"
he said. "They never had to turn themselves from good companies into
great companies. They had parents like David Packard and George
Merck, who shaped the character of greatness from early on. But what
about the vast majority of companies that wake up partway through life
and realize that they're good, but not great?"
I now realize that Meehan was exaggerating for effectwith his "useless"
comment, but his essential observation was correctthat truly greatcomThe
Good-to-Great Study
o 1.00 = Market Baseline
Transition Point
-15 -10 +5
Shows average ratio, each company set to 1.00 at transition date.
+10
Good-to-Great
Companies
Direct Comparison
Companies
+15 Years from Transition
O
o
Good to Great 3
panies, for the most part, have always been great. And the vastmajority of
goodcompanies remain justthatgood, but not great. Indeed, Meehan's
comment provedto be an invaluable gift, as it planted the seed of a ques
tion that became the basis of this entire booknamely, Can a goodcom
pany become a great company and, if so, how? Or is the disease of "just
being good" incurable?
Fiveyears afterthat fateful dinnerwecan nowsay, withoutquestion, that
good to great does happen, and we've learned much about the underlying
variables that make it happen. Inspired by Bill Meehan's challenge, my
research team and I embarked on a five-year research effort, a journey to
explore the inner workings ofgood to great.
Toquickly grasp the concept ofthe project, look at the charton page 2.*
In essence, we identified companies that made the leap from good results
to greatresults and sustained those results for at leastfifteen years. Wecom
paredthesecompanies to a carefully selected control group of comparison
companies that failed to make the leap, or if they did, failed to sustain it.
We then compared the good-to-great companies to the comparison com
panies to discover the essential and distinguishing factors at work.
The good-to-great examples that made the final cut into the study
attained extraordinary results, averaging cumulative stock returns 6.9
times the general market in the fifteen years following their transition
points.2 Toput that in perspective, General Electric (considered bymany
to be the best-led company in America at the end of the twentieth cen
tury) outperformed the market by 2.8 times over the fifteen years 1985 to
2000.3 Furthermore, if you invested $1 in a mutual fund of the good-togreat
companies in 1965, holding each company at the general market
rate until the date of transition, and simultaneously invested $1 in a gen
eral market stock fund, your $1 in the good-to-great fund taken out on
January 1, 2000, would have multiplied 471 times, comparedto a 56fold
increase in the market.4
These are remarkable numbers, made all the more remarkable when
you consider the fact that they came from companies that had previously
beensoutterly i/nremarkable. Consider justone case, Walgreens. Forover
forty years, Walgreens had bumped along as a very average company,
moreor less tracking the general market. Then in 1975, seemingly out of
nowherebang!Walgreens began to climb . . . and climb . . . and
*A description of howthe chartson pages 2 and 4 werecreated appears in chapter 1
notes at the end of the book.
$500
$400
$300
$200
Jim Collins
Cumulative Stock Returns of $1 Invested,
1965-2000
Good-to-Great
Companies: $471
Direct Comparison
$100 r Companies: $93
General Market: $56
1970 1976 1982 1988 1994 2000
Notes:
1. $1 divided evenly across companies in each set, January 1,1965.
2. Each company held at market rate of return, until transition date.
3. Cumulative value of each fund shown as of January 1,2000.
4. Dividends reinvested, adjusted for all stock splits.
climb ... and climb ... and it just kept climbing. From December 31,
1975, to January 1, 2000, $1 invested in Walgreens beat $1 invested in
technology superstar Intel by nearlytwotimes,General Electric by nearly
five times, Coca-Cola bynearly eighttimes, and the general stock market
(including the NASDAQ stock run-up at the end of 1999) by overfifteen
times.*
Howon earth did a companywith such a long historyof being nothing
special transform itself into an enterprise that outperformed some of the
best-led organizations in the world? Andwhywas Walgreens able to make
the leap when other companies in the same industrywith the same oppor
tunities and similar resources, such as Eckerd, did not make the leap?
This single case captures the essence of our quest.
This book is not about Walgreens per se, or any of the specific compa-
*Calculations of stock returns used throughout this book reflect the total cumulative
return to an investor, dividends reinvested and adjusted for stock splits. The "general
stock market" (often referred to as simply "the market") reflects the totality of stocks
tradedon the NewYork Exchange,American StockExchange,and NASDAQ. See the
notes to chapter 1 for detailson data sourcesand calculations.
Good to Great 5
nieswestudied. It isabout the questionCan a good company becomea
great company and, if so, how?and our search for timeless, universal
answers that can be applied byanyorganization.
'r^^^ dftliemsiirpriS'-
:ypg andI quite c$ntfrary tacfflventional wisdom, but one giant conclu-
>;;siQp'stinds above ,the*otheri: We believe thatalmost a/Tyjorgaoization
. can ^uDstential^jrnprpvelts stature and pe%rmancer Rerha|Ds;gven
; ^GSrrjer gr^at,.if it cri|pientious|y applies |he%iram4wprk of ideas
;Vwe^euncay^d /, .] ^ / \ V% [' t't">:> fJ/( "
This book is dedicated to teaching what weVe learned. The remainder
of this introductory chapter tells the story of our journey, outlines our
research method, and previews the key findings. In chapter 2, we launch
headlong into the findings themselves, beginning with one of the most
provocative of the whole study: Level 5leadership.
UNDAUNTED CURIOSITY
People often ask, "What motivates you to undertake these huge research
projects?" It's a good question. The answer is, "Curiosity." There is noth
ing I find more exciting than picking a question that I don't know the
answer to and embarking on a quest for answers. It's deeply satisfying to
climb into the boat, like Lewis and Clark, and head west, saying, "We
don't know what well find when we get there, butwe'll besure to letyou
know whenweget back."
Here is the abbreviated story ofthis particular odyssey ofcuriosity.
Phase 1: The Search
With the question in hand, I began to assemble a team of researchers.
(When I use "we" throughout this book, I am referring to the research
team. In all, twenty-one people worked on the project at key points, usu
allyin teams of four to six at a time.)
Our first task was to find companies thatshowed the good-to-great pat
tern exemplified in the charton page 2.Welaunched a six-month "death
march of financial analysis," looking for companies that showed the fol6
Jim Collins
lowingbasic pattern: fifteen-year cumulativestockreturns at or below the
general stock market, punctuated by a transition point, then cumulative
returns at least three times the market over the next fifteen years. We
picked fifteen years because it would transcend one-hit wonders and
lucky breaks (you can't justbe lucky for fifteen years) and would exceed
the average tenure ofmostchiefexecutive officers (helpingus to separate
great companies from companies that just happened to have a single
great leader). We picked three times the market because it exceeds the
performance of most widely acknowledged great companies. For per
spective, a mutual fund of the following "marquis set" of companiesbeat
the market by only 2.5 times over the years 1985 to 2000: 3M, Boeing,
Coca-Cola, GE, Hewlett-Packard, Intel, Johnson & Johnson, Merck,
Motorola, Pepsi, Procter& Gamble, Wal-Mart, and Walt Disney. Not a
bad set to beat.
From an initial universe ofcompanies that appearedon the Fortune 500
in the years 1965 to 1995, we systematically searched and sifted, eventually
finding eleven good-to-great examples. (I've put a detailed description of
our search in Appendix LA.) However, a couple of points deserve brief
mention here. First, a company had to demonstrate the good-to-great pat
tern independent ofits industry; ifthe whole industry showed the samepat
tern, we dropped the company. Second, we debated whether we should
use additional selection criteria beyond cumulative stock returns, such as
impacton society and employee welfare. We eventually decided to limit
our selection to the good-to-great results pattern, aswecould not conceive
of any legitimate and consistent method for selecting on these other vari
ables without introducing our own biases. In the last chapter, however, I
address the relationship between corporate values and enduring greatcom
panies, but the focus ofthisparticular research effort ison the very specific
question of how to turn a good organization into one that produces sus
tained great results.
Atfirst glance, wewere surprised bythe list. Who would have thought
that Fannie Mae would beat companies likeGE and Coca-Cola? Or that
Walgreens could beat Intel? The surprising lista dowdier group would
be hard to findtaught usa key lesson right up front. It ispossible to turn
good intogreat in the most unlikely ofsituations. Thisbecame the first of
many surprises that led us to reevaluate our thinking about corporate
greatness.
Good to Great
GOOD-TO-GREAT CASES
Results from Transition
Point to 15 Years beyond T Year to
Company Transition Point* T Year + 15
Abbott 3.98 times the market 1974-1989
Circuit City 18.50 times the market 1982-1997
Fannie Mae 7.56 times the market 1984-1999
Gillette 7.39 times the market 1980-1995
Kimberly-Clark 3.42 times the market 1972-1987
Kroger 4.17 times the market 1973-1988
Nucor 5.16 times the market 1975-1990
Philip Morris 7.06 times the market 1964-1979
Pitney Bowes 7.16 times the market 1973-1988
Walgreens 7.34 times the market 1975-1990
Wells Fargo 3.99 times the market 1983-1998
*Ratio ofcumulative stock returns relative to the general stock market.
Phase 2: Compared to What?
Next, we took perhaps the most important step in the entire research
effort: contrasting the good-to-great companies to a carefully selected set
of "comparison companies." The crucial question in our study is not,
What did the good-to-great companies share in common?Rather, the cru
cial question is, What did the good-to-great companies share in common
that distinguished them from the comparison companies? Think of it this
way: Suppose you wanted to study whatmakes gold medal winners in the
Olympic Games. If you only studied the gold medal winners by them8
]im Collins
selves, you'd find that they all had coaches. But if you looked at the ath
letes that made the Olympic team, but neverwona medal,you'd find that
they also had coaches! The key question is, What systematically distin
guishes gold medal winners from those who never won a medal?
We selected two sets of comparison companies. The first set consisted
of "direct comparisons"companies that were in the same industry as
the good-to-great companies with the same opportunities and similar
resources at the time of transition, but that showed no leap from good to
great. (See Appendix LB for details ofour selection process.) The second
consisted of "unsustained comparisons"companies that made a shortterm
shift from good to great but failed to maintain the trajectoryto
address the question ofsustainability. (See Appendix l.C.) In all, thisgave
us a total studyset of twenty-eight companies: eleven good-to-great com
panies, eleven directcomparisons, and six unsustained comparisons.
IILE.EMTIIlEJmiJULMI -
Good-to-Great Companies Direct Comparisons
Abbott Upjohn
Circuit City Silo
Fannie Mae Great Western
Gillette Warner-Lambert
Kimberly-Clark Scott Paper
Kroger A&P
Nucor Bethlehem Steel
Philip Morris R. J. Reynolds
Pitney Bowes Addressograph
Walgreens Eckerd
Wells Fargo BankofAmerica
Unsustained Comparisons
Burroughs
Chrysler
Harris
Hasbro
Rubbermaid
Teledyne
Good to Great
Phase 3: Inside the Black Box
We then turned our attention to a deep analysis of each case. We col
lected all articles published on the twenty-eight companies, dating back
fifty years or more. We systematically coded all the material into cate
gories, such as strategy, technology, leadership, and so forth. Then we
interviewed mostof the good-to-great executives whoheld keypositions of
responsibility during the transition era. Wealso initiated a wide range of
qualitative and quantitative analyses, looking at everything from acquisi
tions to executive compensation, from business strategy to corporate cul
ture, from layoffs to leadership style, from financial ratios to management
turnover. When all was said and done, the total project consumed 10.5
people years of effort. Weread and systematically coded nearly 6,000 arti
cles, generated more than 2,000 pages of interview transcripts, and cre
ated 384million bytes ofcomputerdata. (SeeAppendix l.D fora detailed
list of all our analyses and activities.)
Wecame to think ofour research effort asakinto looking insidea black
box. Each step along the way was like installing anotherlightbulb to shed
lighton the inner workings ofthe good-to-great process.
Good Results
Great Results
What's Inside
the
Black Box?
With data in hand, we began a series of weekly research-team debates.
For each of the twenty-eight companies, members of the research team
and I would systematically read all the articles, analyses, interviews, and
the research coding. I would make a presentation to the team on that spe
cificcompany, drawing potential conclusions and asking questions. Then
we would debate, disagree, pound on tables, raise our voices, pause and
10 Jim Collins
reflect, debatesomemore,pauseand think, discuss, resolve, question,and
debate yet again about "whatit all means."
The core of our method was a systematic process of contrasting the
good-to-great examples to the comparisons, always asking, "What's differ
ent?"
We also made particular note of "dogs that did not bark." In the Sher
lock Holmes classic "The Adventure of Silver Blaze" Holmes identified
"the curiousincident ofthe dogin the night-time" as the keyclue. It turns
out that the dog did nothing in the nighttime and that, according to
Holmes, was the curious incident, which led him to the conclusion that
the prime suspect must have been someone whoknewthe dogwell.
In our study, whatwedidn't finddogs that wemight haveexpected to
bark but didn'tturned out to be some of the best clues to the inner work
ings of good to great. When we stepped inside the black box and turned
on the lightbulbs, wewerefrequently justas astonished at whatwe did not
see as what we did. For example:
 Larger-than-life, celebrity leaders who ride in from the outside are
negatively correlated with taking a company from good to great. Ten
of eleven good-to-great CEOs came from inside the company,
whereas the comparison companies tried outside CEOs six times
more often.
 We found no systematic pattern linking specific forms of executive
compensation to the process of going from good to great. The idea
that the structure of executive compensation is a keydriver in corpo
rate performance is simplynot supportedby the data.
 Strategy per se did not separate the good-to-great companiesfrom the
comparison companies. Both sets of companies had well-defined
strategies, and there is no evidence that the good-to-great companies
spent more time on long-range strategic planning than the compari
son companies.
Good to Great 11
 The good-to-great companies did not focus principally on what to do
to become great; they focused equallyon what notto do and what to
stop doing.
 Technology and technology-driven change has virtually nothing to do
with igniting a transformation from good to great. Technology can
accelerate a transformation, but technology cannot cause a transfor
mation.
 Mergers and acquisitions play virtually no role in igniting a transfor
mation from good to great; two bigmediocrities joined together never
makeone great company.
 The good-to-great companies paid scant attention to managing
change, motivating people, or creating alignment. Under the right
conditions, the problems ofcommitment, alignment, motivation, and
change largely melt away.
 The good-to-great companies had no name, tagline, launch event, or
program to signify theirtransformations. Indeed, some reported being
unaware of the magnitude of the transformation at the time; only
later, in retrospect, did it become clear. Yes, they produced a truly rev
olutionary leap in results, but not bya revolutionary process.
 The good-to-great companies were not, by and large, in great indus
tries, and some were in terrible industries. In no case do we have a
company that justhappened to be sitting on the nose cone ofa rocket
when it took off. Greatness is not a function of circumstance. Great
ness, it turns out, is largely a matter of conscious choice.
Phase 4: Chaos to Concept
I've tried to come up with a simple way to convey what was required togo
from all the data, analyses, debates, and "dogs that did not bark" to the
final findings in this book. The best answer I cangive is that it was an iter
ative process oflooping back andforth, developing ideas and testing them
against the data, revising the ideas, building a framework, seeing it break
under the weight of evidence, and rebuilding it yet again. That process
was repeated over and over, until everything hung together in a coherent
framework ofconcepts. We allhave a strength ortwo in life, andI suppose
mine is the ability to take a lump of unorganized information, see pat
terns, and extract order from the messto go from chaos to concept.
That said, however, I wish to underscore again that the concepts in the
final framework are not my"opinions." While I cannot extract my own
12 Jim Collins
psychology and biases entirely from the research, each finding in the final
framework met a rigorous standard before the researchteam would deem
it significant. Every primary concept in the final framework showedup as
a change variable in 100 percent of the good-to-great companies and in
less than 30 percent of the comparison companies during the pivotal
years. Any insight that failed this test did not make it into the book as a
chapter-levelconcept.
Here, then, is an overview of the framework of concepts and a preview
of what's to come in the restof the book. (See the diagram below.) Think
of the transformation as a process of buildup followed by breakthrough,
broken into three broad stages: disciplined people, disciplined thought,
and disciplined action. Within each of these three stages, there are two
key concepts, shown in the framework and described below. Wrapping
around this entire framework is a concept we came to call the flywheel,
which captures the gestalt of the entire process of going from good to
great.
Level 5 FirstWho ... Confront the Hedgehog Culture of Technology
Leadership Then What Brutal Facts Concept Discipline Accelerators
Level 5 Leadership. We were surprised, shocked really, to discover the
type of leadership required for turning a good company into a great one.
Compared to high-profile leaders with big personalities who make head
linesand become celebrities, the good-to-great leadersseem to have come
from Mars. Self-effacing, quiet, reserved, even shythese leaders are a
Good to Great 13
paradoxical blend of personal humility and professional will. They are
more like Lincoln and Socrates than Patton or Caesar.
First Who ... Then What We expected thatgood-to-great leaders would
begin by setting a new vision and strategy. We found instead thatthey first
got the right people onthe bus, the wrong people offthe bus, and the right
people in the right seatsand then they figured outwhere to drive it.The
old adage "People are your most important asset" turns out to be wrong.
People arenot your most important asset. The right people are.
Confront the Brutal Facts (Yet Never Lose Faith). Welearned that a for
mer prisoner ofwar had more toteach us about what it takes tofind a path
to greatness than most books on corporate strategy. Every good-to-great
company embraced what we came to call the Stockdale Paradox: You must
maintain unwavering faith that you can and will prevail in theend, regard
less of the difficulties, AND at the same time have the discipline to con
front the most brutal facts ofyour current reality, whatever they might be.
The Hedgehog Concept (Simplicity within the Three Circles). To go
from good to great requires transcending the curse of competence. Just
because something is your core businessjust because you've been doing
it for years or perhaps even decadesdoes notnecessarily mean you can
be the bestin the world at it.And ifyou cannotbe the bestin the world at
your core business, then your core business absolutely cannot form the
basis ofa great company. It must be replaced with a simple concept that
reflects deep understanding ofthree intersecting circles.
A Culture ofDiscipline. All companies have a culture, some companies
have discipline, but few companies have aculture ofdiscipline. When you
have disciplined people, you don't need hierarchy. When you have disci
plined thought, you don't need bureaucracy. When you have disciplined
action, you don'tneedexcessive controls. Whenyou combine a culture of
discipline with anethic ofentrepreneurship, you get the magical alchemy
of great performance.
Technology Accelerators. Good-to-great companies think differently
about the role oftechnology. They never use technology as the primary
means ofigniting a transformation. Yet, paradoxically, they are pioneers
in the application of carefully selected technologies. We learned that
14 Jim Collins
technology by itself is never a primary, root cause of either greatness or
decline.
TheFlywheel and theDoomLoop. Thosewholaunch revolutions, dra
matic change programs, and wrenching restructurings will almost cer
tainly fail to makethe leap from good to great. No matter how dramatic
the end result, the good-to-great transformations never happened in one
fell swoop. There was no single defining action, no grand program, no
one killer innovation, no solitary lucky break, no miracle moment.
Rather, the process resembled relentlessly pushing a giantheavy flywheel
in one direction, turn upon turn, building momentum until a point of
breakthrough, and beyond.
From Good to Great to Built to Last In an ironic twist, I now see Goodto
Great not as a sequel to Built to Last, but as more ofa prequel. Thisbook is
abouthow toturn a good organization intoonethatproduces sustained great
results. Built to Last isabouthow you take a company with great results and
turn it into an enduring great company oficonic stature. To make that final
shift requires core values and a purpose beyond just making money com
binedwith the key dynamic ofpreserve the core/ stimulate progress.
Good to Sustained Built to Enduring
Great -> Great f Last -> Great
Concepts Results Concepts Company
Ifyou are already a studentof Built to Last, please set aside your ques
tions aboutthe precise links between the two studies asyou embark upon
the findings in Good to Great. In the last chapter, I return to this question
and link the twostudiestogether.
THE TIMELESS "PHYSICS" OF GOOD TO GREAT
I had just finished presenting myresearch to a set of Internet executives
gathered at a conference, when a hand shot up. "Will your findings con
tinue to apply in the new economy? Don't we need to throw out all the
oldideas andstart from scratch?" It'sa legitimate question, aswedolive in
a time of dramatic change, and it comes up so often that I'd like to dis
pense with it right up front, before heading intothe meatofthe book.
Good to Great 15
Yes, the world ischanging, and will continue to do so. Butthat does not
mean we should stop the search for timeless principles. Think of it this
way: While the practices ofengineering continually evolve and change,
the laws of physics remain relatively fixed. I like to think of our work as a
search for timeless principlesthe enduring physics of great organiza
tionsthat will remain true and relevant no matter how the world
changes around us. Yes, the specific application will change (the engi
neering), but certain immutable laws of organized human performance
(the physics) will endure.
Thetruth is, there's nothing new about being ina new economy. Those
who faced the invention ofelectricity, the telephone, the automobile, the
radio, or the transistordid they feel it was any less of a new economy
than we feel today? And in each rendition ofthe new economy, the best
leaders have adhered to certain basic principles, with rigor and discipline.
Some people will point outthat the scale and pace ofchange is greater
today than anytime in the past. Perhaps. Even so, some ofthe companies
in ourgood-to-great study faced rates ofchange that rival anything in the
new economy. For example, during the early 1980s, the banking industry
was completely transformed in about three years, as the full weight of
deregulation came crashing down. Itwas certainly a new economy for the
banking industry! Yet Wells Fargo applied every single finding inthis book
to produce great results, right smack in the middle of the fast-paced
change triggered byderegulation.
$corning chapters, keep one keypoint ,
t the old economy, Nor is it about the :
^^^^^s^isomy.^|t_iSc-ridi'- even sibout the companies you're reading
t-l-^G^ It isultimately about ope thing:;
gttfr^ about how you take a
y^^^P^^^.^^ftrh'.it Jntoone thatproduces sustained great
;#"Ww^ best applies to your .
This might come as a surprise, butI don't primarily think ofmy work as
about the study ofbusiness, nor do I see this as fundamentally a business
book. Rather, I see my work as being about discovering what creates
enduring great organizations of any type. I'm curious to understand the
16 Jim Collins
fundamental differences between great and good, between excellent and
mediocre. I justhappen to use corporations as a means of getting inside
the blackbox. I do thisbecause publicly traded corporations, unlike other
types of organizations, have two huge advantages for research: a widely
agreed upon definition of results (so we can rigorously select a study set)
and a plethora of easily accessible data.
That good is the enemy of great is not just a business problem. It is a
human problem. Ifwe have cracked the code on the question ofgood to
great, we should have something of value to any type of organization.
Good schools might become great schools. Good newspapers might
become great newspapers. Good churches might become great churches.
Good government agencies might become great agencies. And good com
panies might become greatcompanies.
So, I invite you to join meonan intellectual adventure to discover what
it takes to turngood into great. I also encourage you to question andchal
lenge what you learn. As one ofmy favorite professors once said, "Thebest
students are those who never quite believe theirprofessors." True enough.
But he also said, "One ought not to reject the data merely because one
does not like what the data implies." I offer everything herein for your
thoughtful consideration, not blind acceptance. You're the judge and
jury. Let the evidence speak.
C H A P T E R
First Who ... Confront the Hedgehog Culture of Technology
1 Then What Brutal Facts Concept Discipline Accelerators
You can accomplish anything in life, provided that youdo not
mind who gets the credit.
Harry S. Truman1
1
$8n 1971, a seemingly ordinary man named Darwin E. Smith became
chief executive of Kimberly-Clark, a stodgy old paper company whose
stock had fallen 36 percent behind the general market over the previous
twenty years.
Smith, the company's mild-mannered in-house lawyer, wasn't so sure
the board had madethe right choicea feeling further reinforced whena
director pulled Smith asideand reminded him that he lackedsome of the
qualifications for the position.2 But CEO he was, and CEO he remained
for twentyyears.
What a twenty years it was. In that period, Smith created a stunning
transformation, turning Kimberly-Clark into the leading paper-based
consumer products company in the world. Under his stewardship, Kim
berly-Clark generated cumulative stock returns 4.1 times the general mar
ket, handily beating its direct rivals Scott Paper and Procter & Gamble
18 Jim Collins
and outperforming such venerable companies as Coca-Cola, Hewlett-
Packard, 3M, and General Electric.
It was an impressive performance, one ofthe bestexamples in the twen
tieth century of taking a good company and making it great. Yet few peo
pleeven ardent students of management and corporate historyknow
anything about Darwin Smith. He probably would have liked it that way.
A man who carried no airs of self-importance, Smith found his favorite
companionship amongplumbers and electricians and spent his vacations
rumbling around his Wisconsin farm in the cab of a backhoe, digging
holes and moving rocks.3 He never cultivated hero status or executive
celebrity status.4 When a journalist asked him to describe his manage
ment style, Smith, dressed unfashionably like a farm boywearing his first
suit bought at J. C. Penney, just stared back from the other side of his
nerdy-looking black-rimmed glasses. After a long, uncomfortable silence,
he said simply: "Eccentric."5 The Wall Street Journal did not write a
splashy feature on Darwin Smith.
But ifyouwere to think ofDarwin Smithassomehow meekor soft, you
would be terriblymistaken. His awkward shyness and lack of pretense was
coupled with a fierce, even stoic, resolve toward life. Smith grew up as a
poor Indiana farm-town boy, puttinghimselfthrough college by working
the day shift at International Harvester and attending Indiana University
at night. One day, he lostpartofa finger on the job. The story goes that he
went to class that evening and returned to work the next day. While that
might be a bit of an exaggeration, he clearly did not let a lost finger slow
down his progress toward graduation. He keptworking full-time, he kept
going to class at night, and he earned admission to Harvard Law School.6
Later in life, two months after becoming CEO, doctors diagnosed Smith
with nose and throat cancer, predicting he had less than a yearto live. He
informedthe board but made it clear that he was not dead yet and had no
plans to die anytime soon. Smithheld fully to hisdemandingwork sched
ule while commuting weekly from Wisconsin to Houston for radiation
therapy andlived twenty-five more years, most ofthemas CEO.7
Smith brought that same ferocious resolve to rebuilding Kimberly-
Clark, especially when he made the most dramatic decision in the com
pany's history: Sell the mills.8 Shortly after he became CEO, Smith and
his team had concluded that the traditional core businesscoated
paperwas doomed to mediocrity. Its economics were bad and the com
petition weak.9 But, theyreasoned, if Kimberly-Clark thrust itself into the
$40
$30
$20
$10
1951
$40
1971
Good to Great 19
Before Darwin Smith
Kimberly-Clark, Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1951 -1971
Darwin Smith Tenure
Kimberly-Clark, Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1971 -1991
General Market:
$8.30
Kimberly-Clark:
$5.30
1971
Kimberly-Clark:
$39.87
General Market:
$9.81
1991
20 Jim Collins
LEV|I^^^^^TIVE
Builgl|l^^^%j^ta^lthrough aparadoxical
b\eW0f^^M0i^k^l\\y and professional
Level 5 Hierarchy
fire of the consumer paper-products industry, world-class competition like
Procter&Gamble would force it to achieve greatness or perish.
So, like the general who burned the boats upon landing, leaving only
one option (succeed or die), Smith announced the decision to sell the
mills, in whatone board member called the gutsiest move he'd ever seen
a CEO make. Sell even the mill in Kimberly, Wisconsin, and throw all
the proceeds into the consumerbusiness, investing in brandslike Huggies
and Kleenex.10
The business media called the move stupid and Wall Street analysts
downgraded the stock.11 Smith never wavered. Twenty-five years later,
Kimberly-Clark owned Scott Paper outright and beat Procter& Gamble
in six of eight productcategories.12 In retirement, Smith reflected on his
exceptional performance, saying simply, "I never stopped trying to
become qualifiedfor the job."13
Good to Great 21
NOT WHAT WE EXPECTED
Darwin Smith stands as a classic exampleof what we came to call a Level
5 leaderan individual who blends extreme personal humility with
intense professional will. We found leaders of this type at the helm of
every good-to-great company during the transition era. Like Smith, they
were self-effacing individuals who displayed the fierce resolve to do what
ever needed to be done to make the companygreat.
;\:rLe)/f5 leader^ eh^friel th^ir ego:riBeds away from themselves and
.$li^ notihat Level 5,
i^l|2Ug|^$ -|B^^^Jja#t9j&i^C#o^^^^^Si^se^%axM^vito>rae&73Rrafipf' for #?$ Institution, not
The term Level 5 refers to the highestlevel in a hierarchy of executive
capabilities that we identified in our research. (See the diagram on page
20.) While you don't need to move in sequence from Level 1 to Level
5it might be possible to fill in some of the lower levels laterfully
developed Level 5 leaders embodyall five layers of the pyramid. I am not
goingto belabor all five levels here, as Levels 1 through 4 are somewhat
self-explanatory and are discussed extensively by other authors. This
chapter will focus instead on the distinguishing traits of the good-to-great
leadersnamely level 5 traitsin contrast to the comparison leaders in
our study.
But first, please permit a brief digression to set an important context.
We were not looking for Level 5 leadership or anything like it. In fact, I
gave the research team explicit instructions to downplay the role of top
executives so that we could avoid the simplistic "credit the leader" or
"blame the leader" thinking common today.
To usean analogy, the "Leadership isthe answer to everything" perspec
tive is the modern equivalent ofthe "God isthe answer to everything" per
spective that held back our scientific understanding of the physical world
in the Dark Ages. In the 1500s, people ascribed all events they didn't
understand to God. Why did the crops fail? God did it. Why did we have
an earthquake?God did it.What holds the planets in place? God. But with
22 Jim Collins
the Enlightenment, we began the search for a more scientific understand
ingphysics, chemistry, biology, and so forth. Not that we became athe
ists, but wegained deeperunderstanding abouthowthe universe ticks.
Similarly, every time we attribute everything to "Leadership," we'reno
different from people in the 1500s. We're simply admitting our ignorance.
Not that we should become leadership atheists (leadership does matter),
but every time we throw our hands up in frustrationreverting back to
"Well, the answer must beLeadership!"we prevent ourselves from gain
ing deeper, more scientific understanding about what makes great com
panies tick.
So,early in the project, I keptinsisting, "Ignore the executives." But the
research team kept pushing back, "No! There is something consistently
unusual about them. We can't ignore them." And I'd respond, "But the
comparison companies also had leaders, even some great leaders. So,
what's different?" Back and forth the debate raged.
Finallyas should always be the casethe data won.
The good-to-great executives were all cut from the same cloth. It didn't
matter whether the company was consumer or industrial, in crisis or
steady state, offered services or products. It didn't matter when the transi
tion took place or howbig the company. All the good-to-great companies
had Level 5 leadership at the time of transition. Furthermore, the absence
ofLevel 5leadership showed up asa consistent pattern in the comparison
companies. Given that Level 5 leadership cuts against the grain of con
ventional wisdom, especially the beliefthat we need larger-than-life sav
iors with big personalities to transform companies, it is importantto note
that Level 5 isan empirical finding, not an ideological one.
HUMILITY + WILL = LEVEL 5
Level 5 leaders are a study in duality: modest and willful, humble and
fearless. To quickly grasp this concept, think of United States President
AbrahamLincoln (one of the few Level 5 presidents in United Stateshis
tory), who never let his ego get in the way of his primaryambition for the
larger cause of an enduring great nation. Yet those who mistook Mr. Lin
coln's personal modesty, shy nature, and awkward manner as signs of
weakness found themselves terribly mistaken, to the scale of 250,000Con
federate and 360,000 Unionlives, including Lincoln's own.14
Good to Great 23
While it might be a bit ofa stretch to compare the good-to-great CEOs
to Abraham Lincoln, they did display the sameduality. Consider the case
of Colman Mockler, CEO of Gillette from 1975 to 1991. During Mockler's
tenure, Gillette faced three attacks that threatened to destroy the
company's opportunity forgreatness. Twoattacks came as hostile takeover
bids from Revlon, led by Ronald Perelman, a cigar-chomping raider with
a reputation for breaking apart companies to pay down junk bonds and
finance more hostile raids.15 The third attack came from Coniston Part
ners, an investment group that bought 5.9 percent of Gillette stock and
initiated a proxy battle to seize control of the board, hoping to sell the
company to the highest bidder and pocket a quick gain on their shares.16
Had Gillette been flipped to Perelman at the price he offered, shareowners
would have reaped an instantaneous 44 percent gain on their stock.17
Looking at a $2.3 billion short-term stock profit across 116 million shares,
most executives would have capitulated, pocketing millions from flipping
their own stock and cashing in on generous golden parachutes.18
Colman Mockler did not capitulate, choosing instead to fight for the
future greatness of Gillette, eventhough he himselfwouldhave pocketed
a substantial sum on his own shares. A quiet and reserved man, always
courteous, Mocklerhad the reputation ofa gracious, almostpatriciangen
tleman. Yet those who mistook Mockler's reserved nature for weakness
found themselves beaten in the end. In the proxy fight, senior Gillette
executives reached out to thousands of individual investorsperson by
person, phone call by phone callandwon the battle.
Now, you might be thinking, "But that just sounds like self-serving
entrenched management fighting for their interests at the expense of
shareholder interests." On the surface, it mightlookthat way, but consider
two key facts.
First, Mocklerand his team staked the company's future on huge invest
ments in radically newand technologically advanced systems (laterknown
as Sensor and Mach3). Had the takeover been successful, these projects
would almost certainly have been curtailed or eliminated, and none of us
would be shaving with Sensor, Sensor forWomen,or the Mach3leaving
hundreds ofmillions ofpeople to a more painful daily battle with stubble.19
Second, at the time of the takeover battle, Sensor promised significant
future profits that were not reflected in the stock price because it was in
secret development. With Sensor in mind, the board and Mockler
believed that the future value of the shares far exceeded the current price,
24 Jim Collins
Colman Mockler's Triumph
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested, 1976 - 1996
Gillette versus Takeover Bid and Market
$100 Gillette: $95.68
$75
$50
$25
44%Premium Offered in y/ TakeoverBid
Takeover Bid /VU/ Performance: $30.40
General Market: $14.92
1976 1986 1996
This chart shows how an investor would have fared under the following scenarios:
1. $1 invested in Gillette, held from December 31,1976 through December 31,1996.
2. $1 invested in Gillette, held from December 31, 1976 but then sold to Ronald
Perelman for a 44.44% premium on October 31,1986, the proceeds then invested in
the general stock market.
3. $1 investedinGeneralMarket heldfrom December31,1976 through December31,1996.
even with the price premium offered by the raiders. To sell out would
have made short-term shareflippers happy but would have been utterly
irresponsible to long-term shareholders.
In the end, Mockler andtheboard were proved right, stunningly so. Ifa
shareflipper had accepted the 44 percent price premium offered by
Ronald Perelman on October 31,1986, and then invested the full amount
in the general market for ten years, through the end of 1996, he would
have come out three times worse offthan a shareholder who had stayed
with Mockler and Gillette.20 Indeed, the company, its customers, and the
shareholders would have been ill served had Mockler capitulated to the
raiders, pocketed his millions,and retired to a life of leisure.
Sadly, Mockler was never able to enjoy the full fruits of his effort. On
January 25, 1991, the Gillette teamreceived an advance copy ofthe cover
of Forbes magazine, which featured an artist's rendition of Mockler stand
ing atop a mountain holding a giantrazor above his head in a triumphal
pose, while the vanquished languish on the hillsides below. The other
Good to Great 25
executives razzed the publicity-shy Mockler, who had likely declined
requests to be photographedfor the coverin the first place, amused at see
ing him portrayed as a corporateversion ofConan the Triumphant. Walk
ing back to his office, minutes afterseeingthis public acknowledgmentof
his sixteenyears of struggle, Mocklercrumpled to the floor, struckdead by
a massive heart attack.21
I do not know whether Mockler would have chosen to die in harness,
but I am quite confident that he would not have changed his approach as
chief executive. His placid persona hid an inner intensity,a dedication to
making anything he touched the best it could possibly benot just
because of what he would get, but because he simply couldn't imagine
doing it any other way. It wouldn't have been an option within Colman
Mockler'svalue system to take the easy path and turn the company overto
those who would milk it like a cow, destroying its potential to become
great, any more than it would have been an option for Lincoln to sue for
peace and lose forever the chance ofan enduring great nation.
Ambition for the Company: Setting Up Successors
for Success
When David Maxwell became CEO of Fannie Mae in 1981,the company
was losing $1 million every single business day. Overthe next nine years,
Maxwell transformed Fannie Mae into a high-performance culture that
rivaled the best Wall Street firms, earning $4 million every business day
and beatingthe generalstock market 3.8to 1.Maxwell retiredwhilestill at
the top of his game, feeling that the company would be ill served if he
stayed on too long,and turned the companyoverto an equallycapablesuc
cessor, Jim Johnson. Shortly thereafter, Maxwell's retirement package,
whichhad grown to be worth $20million based on Fannie Mae'sspectac
ular performance, becamea pointofcontroversy in Congress (FannieMae
operates under a governmentcharter). Maxwell respondedbywritinga let
ter to his successor, in which he expressed concern that the controversy
wouldtrigger an adverse reaction in Washington that could jeopardize the
future of the company. He then instructed Johnson not to pay him the
remaining balance$5.5 millionand asked that the entire amount be
contributed to the Fannie Maefoundation for low-income housing.22
DavidMaxwell, like DarwinSmithand Colman Mockler, exemplified a
key trait of Level 5 leaders: ambition first and foremost for the company
and concern for its success rather than for one's own riches and personal
26 Jim Collins
renown. Level 5 leaders wantto see the company even more successful in
the nextgeneration, comfortable with the ideathat mostpeoplewon'teven
know that the roots ofthat success trace back to their efforts. As one Level 5
leader said, "I want to look out from my porch at one ofthe great compa
nies in the world someday and be able to say, 1 used to work there.' "
In contrast, the comparison leaders, concerned more with their own
reputation for personal greatness, often failed to set the company up for
success in the nextgeneration. After all,whatbettertestamentto yourown
personal greatness than that the placefalls apartafteryouleave?
Some had the "biggest dog" syndromethey didn't mind other dogs in
the kennel, as long as they remained the biggest one. One comparison
CEO was said to have treated successor candidates "the way Henry the
VIII treated wives."23
Consider the case of Rubbermaid, an unsustained comparison com
pany that grew from obscurity to number one on Fortune's annual list of
America's Most Admired Companies and then, just as quickly, disinte
grated into such sorry shape that it had to be acquired by Newell to save
itself. The architect of this remarkable story, a charismatic and brilliant
leader named Stanley Gault, became synonymous in the late 1980s with
the success of the company. In 312 articles collected on Rubbermaid,
Gault comes through as a hard-driving, egocentric executive. In one
article, he responds to the accusation of being a tyrant with the state
ment, "Yes, but I'm a sincere tyrant."24 In another, drawn directly from
his owncommentson leadingchange,the word I appearsforty-four times
("I could lead the charge"; "I wrote the twelve objectives"; "I presented
and explained the objectives"), whereas the word we appears just sixteen
times.25 Gault had every reason to be proud of his executive success.
Rubbermaid generated forty consecutive quarters of earnings growth
under his leadershipan impressive performance, and one that deserves
respect.
Butandthis is the keypointGaultdid not leavebehind a company
that would be great without him. His chosen successor lasted only one
Good to Great 27
yearon the joband the next in line faced a managementteam so shallow
that he had to temporarily shoulderfour jobs while scramblingto identify
a newnumber two executive.26 Gault'ssuccessors found themselves strug
gling not only with a management void, but also with strategic voids that
would eventually bring the company to its knees.27
Of course, you might say, "Yes, Rubbermaid fell apart after Gault, but
that just proves his personal greatness as a leader." Exactly! Gault was
indeed a tremendous Level 4 leader, perhaps one of the best in the last
fifty years. But he was not a Level 5 leader, and that is one key reason why
Rubbermaid went from good to great for a brief shining moment and
then, just as quickly, went from great to irrelevant.
A Compelling Modesty
In contrast to the very /-centric style of the comparison leaders, we were
struckbyhowthe good-to-great leaders didnt talkabout themselves. Dur
ing interviews with the good-to-great leaders, they'd talk about the com
pany and the contributions of other executives as long as we'd like but
would deflect discussion about their own contributions. When pressed to
talkabout themselves, they'dsay things like, "I hope I'm not soundinglike
a big shot." Or, "If the board hadn't picked such great successors, you
probably wouldn't be talking with me today." Or, "Did I have a lot to do
with it? Oh, that sounds so self-serving. I don't think I can take much
credit.Wewere blessed with marvelous people." Or, "There are plenty of
people in this companywhocould do my job better than I do."
It wasn't just false modesty. Those whoworked with or wroteabout the
good-to-great leaders continually used words like quiet, humble, modest,
reserved, shy, gracious, mild-mannered, self-effacing, understated, did not
believe his own clippings; and so forth. Board member Jim Hlavacek
described Ken Iverson, the CEO who oversaw Nucor's transformation
from near bankruptcyto one of the mostsuccessful steel companies in the
world:
Ken isa verymodest and humble man. I've neverknowna person as suc
cessful in doing what he's done that's as modest. And, I work for a lot of
CEOs of large companies.Andthat's true in his private life as well.The
simplicity of him. I mean little things like he always gets his dogs at the
local pound. He has a simple house that's he's lived in for ages. He only
has a carport and he complained to me one dayabout how he had to use
28 Jim Collins
his credit card to scrapethe frost offhiswindows and he broke the credit
card. "You know, Ken, there's a solution for it; enclose your carport."
And he said, "Ah, heck, it isn'tthat bigofa deal " He'sthat humble
and simple.28
The eleven good-to-great CEOs are some of the most remarkable
CEOsofthe century, given that only eleven companies from the Fortune
500 metthe exacting standards for entry into this study. Yet, despite their
remarkable results, almost no one ever remarked about them! George
Cain, Alan Wurtzel, David Maxwell, Colman Mockler, Darwin Smith,
Jim Herring, Lyle Everingham, Joe Cullman, FredAllen, Cork Walgreen,
Carl Reichardthow many of these extraordinary executives had you
heard of?
The good-to-great leaders never wanted to become larger-than-life
heroes. They never aspired to be put on a pedestal or become unreach
able icons. They were seemingly ordinary people quietly producing extra
ordinary results.
Someofthe comparison leaders provide a striking contrast. ScottPaper,
the comparison company to Kimberly-Clark, hired a CEO named Al
Dunlap, a man cut from a very different cloth than Darwin Smith. Dunlap
loudly beat on his own chest, telling anyone who would listen (and
manywhowould prefer not to) aboutwhathe had accomplished. Quoted
in Business Week about his nineteen months atop ScottPaper, he boasted,
"The Scott story will go down in the annals ofAmerican business history
as one of the most successful, quickest turnarounds ever, [making] other
turnaroundspale by comparison."30
According to Business Week, Dunlap personally accrued $100 million
for 603 days of work at Scott Paper (that's $165,000 per day), largely by
slashing the workforce, cutting the R&D budget in half, and putting the
company on growth steroids in preparation for sale.31 After selling offthe
Good to Great 29
company and pocketing his quick millions, Dunlap wrote a book about
himself, in which he trumpeted his nickname Rambo in Pinstripes. "I
love the Rambomovies," he wrote. "Here's a guywho has zero chance of
success and always wins. Rambo goes into situations against all odds,
expecting to gethisbrains blown out. Buthe doesn't. Atthe end ofthe day
he succeeds, he gets rid of the bad guys. He creates peace out of war.
That's what I do, too."32 Darwin Smith may have enjoyed the mindless
Rambo movies as well, but I suspect he never walked out of a theater and
said to his wife, "You know, I really relate to this Rambo character; he
reminds me of me."
GranteSi the e<?tt^p^r.istQfy^Xs pne.ol th^^ofadmmatic jp, pur
study, birt its not arv isolated case. In over twothirds of the comparirtpersonal
ego that
^^bmpan^
We found this pattern particularly strong in the unsustained compar
isonscases where the company would show a leap in performance
under a talented yet egocentric leader, only to decline in later years. Lee
Iacocca, for example, saved Chrysler from the brink of catastrophe, per
forming one of the most celebrated (and deservedly so) turnarounds in
American business history. Chryslerrose to a height of 2.9 times the mar
ket at a point about halfway through his tenure. Then, however, he
divertedhis attention to makinghimselfone of the mostcelebrated CEOs
in American business history. Investors Business Daily and the WallStreet
Journal chronicled how Iacocca appeared regularly on talk shows like the
Today show and Larry King Live, personally starred in over eighty com
mercials, entertained the idea of running for president of the United
States (quoted at one point, "RunningChrysler has been a biggerjob than
running the country. ... I could handle the national economy in six
months"), and widely promoted his autobiography. The book, Iacocca,
soldseven million copies and elevated him to rockstarstatus, leading him
to be mobbed by thousands of cheering fans upon his arrival in Japan.34
Iacocca's personal stock soared, but in the second half of his tenure,
Chrysler'sstockfell 31 percent behind the general market.
Sadly, Iacocca had trouble leaving center stage and letting go of the
perks of executive kingship. He postponed his retirement so many times
30 Jim Collins
that insiders at Chrysler began to joke that Iacocca stood for "IAmChair
manofChrysler Corporation Always."35 And when he didfinally retire, he
demanded that the board continue to provide a private jet and stock
options.36 Later, he joined forces with noted takeover artist Kirk Kerkorian
to launch a hostile takeover bid for Chrysler.37
Chrysler experienced a brief return to glory in the five years after
Iacocca's retirement, but the company's underlying weaknesses eventu
ally led to a buyout by German carmaker Daimler-Benz.38 Certainly, the
demise of Chrysler as a stand-alone company does not rest entirely on
Iacocca's shoulders (the nextgeneration ofmanagement madethe fateful
decision to sell the company to the Germans), but the fact remains:
Iacocca's brilliant turnaround in the early 1980s did not prove to be sus
tained and Chrysler failed to become an enduring great company.
Unwavering Resolve ... to Do What Must Be Done
It is very important to grasp that Level 5 leadership is not just about
humility and modesty. It is equally about ferocious resolve, an almost
stoic determination to do whatever needs to be done to make the com
pany great.
Indeed,wedebatedfor a long time on the research team about how to
describe the good-to-great leaders. Initially, we penciled in terms like
"selfless executive" and "servant leader." But members of the team vio
lently objected to these characterizations.
"Those labels don't ring true," said Anthony Chirikos. "It makes them
sound weak or meek,but that's not at all the way I think of Darwin Smith
or Colman Mockler. They would do almost anything to make the com
pany great."
Then Eve Li suggested, "Whydon't we just call them Level 5 leaders?
Ifweput a label like 'selfless' or 'servant' on them, people will get entirely
the wrongidea.We need to get people to engagewith the whole concept,
to see both sides ofthe coin. Ifyouonlyget the humilityside,you miss the
whole idea."
Level 5 leaders are fanatically driven, infected with an incurable need
to produce results. They will sell the mills or fire their brother, if that's
what it takes to makethe company great.
When George Cain became CEO of AbbottLaboratories, it sat in the
bottom quartile of the pharmaceutical industry, a drowsy enterprise that
Good to Great 31
had lived for years off its cash cow, erythromycin. Cain didn't have an
inspiring personality to galvanize the company, but he had something
much more powerful: inspired standards. He could not stand mediocrity
in any form and was utterly intolerant of anyone who would accept the
idea that good isgood enough. Cain then setout to destroy one ofthe key
causes of Abbott's mediocrity: nepotism. Systematically rebuilding both
the board and the executive team withthe bestpeople he could find, Cain
made it clear that neither family tiesnor length of tenure would have any
thing to do with whether you held a key position in the company. If you
didn't have the capacity to become the best executive in the industry in
your span ofresponsibility, thenyou would lose your paycheck.39
Such rigorous rebuilding might be expected from an outsider
brought in to turn the company around, but Cain was an eighteen-year
veteran insider anda family member, the son of a previousAbbott pres
ident. Holiday gatherings were probably tense for a few years in the
Cain clan. ("Sorry I had to fire you. Want another slice of turkey?") In
the end, though, family members were quite pleased with the perfor
mance of their stock, for Cain set in motion a profitable growth
machine that, from its transition date in 1974 to 2000, created share
holder returns that beat the market4.5 to 1, handilyoutperforming indus
try superstars Merck and Pfizer.
Upjohn, the direct comparison company to Abbott, also had family
leadership during the same era as George Cain. Unlike George Cain,
Upjohn's CEO never showed the same resolve to break the mediocrity of
nepotism. By the timeAbbott had filled all key seats with the bestpeople,
regardless offamily background, Upjohn still had Blevel family members
holding key positions.40 Virtually identical companies with identical stock
charts up to the point of transition, Upjohn then fell 89 percent behind
Abbott over the next twenty-one years before capitulating in a merger to
Pharmacia in 1995.
As an interesting aside, Darwin Smith, Colman Mockler, and George
Cain came from inside the company. StanleyGault, Al Dunlap, and Lee
Iacocca rode in as saviors from the outside,trumpets blaring. This reflects
a more systematic finding from our study. The evidence does not support
the idea that you need an outside leader to come in and shake up the
place to go from good to great. In fact, going for a high-profile outside
change agent is negatively correlated with a sustained transformation from
good to great. (See Appendix 2.A.)
32 Jim Collins
A superb example of insider-driven change comes from Charles R.
"Cork" Walgreen 3d, who transformed dowdy Walgreens into a company
that outperformed the stock market byover fifteen times from the end of
1975 to January 1, 2000.42 After years of dialogue and debate within his
executive team about Walgreens' food-service operations, Cork sensed
that the team had finally reached a watershed point ofclarity and under
standing: Walgreens' brightest future lay in convenient drugstores, not
food service. Dan Jorndt, who succeeded Walgreen as CEO in 1998,
described whathappened next:
Cork said at one ofourplanning committee meetings, "Okay, now Iam
going to draw the line in the sand. We aregoing to be out ofthe restau
rant business completely in five years." At the time, we had over five
hundred restaurants. You could have heard a pin drop. Hesaid, "I want
toleteverybody know the clock is ticking " Six months later, we were
at our next planning committee meeting and someone mentioned just
in passing thatweonly hadfive years to be out ofthe restaurant business.
Cork was nota real vociferous fellow. Hesort oftapped onthe table and
said, "Listen, you have four and a halfyears. I said you had five years six
months ago. Now you've got four and a half years." Well, that next day,
things really clicked into gear to winding down our restaurant business.
He never wavered. He never doubted; he never second-guessed.43
Like Darwin Smith selling the mills at Kimberly-Clark, Cork Walgreen's
decision required stoic resolve. Not that food service was the
largest part of the business (although it did add substantial profits to the
bottom line). Thereal problem was more emotional. Walgreens had, after
all, invented the malted milkshake and food service was a long-standing
family tradition dating back to his grandfather. Some food-service outlets
were even named after the CEO himselfa restaurant chain named
Corky's. But nomatter, ifWalgreens had to fly in the face oflong-standing
familytradition in order to focus its resources where it could be the best in
Good to Great 33
the world (convenient drugstores), Cork would do it. Quietly, doggedly,
simply.44
The quiet, dogged nature of Level 5 leadersshowed up not only in big
decisions, like selling off the food-service operations or fighting corpo
rate raiders, but also in a personal style of sheer workmanlike diligence.
Alan Wurtzel, a second-generation family member who took over his
family's small company and turned it into Circuit City, perfectly cap
tured the gestalt of this trait. When asked about differences between
himself and his counterpart CEO at Circuit City's comparison company,
Wurtzel summed up: "The showhorseand the plowhorsehe was more
ofa show horse, whereas I was more ofa plow horse."45
The Window and the Mirror
Alan Wurtzel's plow horse comment is fascinating in light of two other
facts. First,he holds a doctor of jurisprudence degree fromYaleclearly,
his plow horse nature had nothing to do with a lack of intelligence. Sec
ond, his plowhorse approachset the stage for trulybest in show results. Let
me put it this way: If you had to choose between $1 invested in Circuit
Cityor $1 invested in General Electric on the day that the legendary Jack
Welch took overGE in 1981 and held to January 1, 2000,you would have
been betteroffwith CircuitCityby six times.46 Nota bad performance,
for a plow horse.
You might expect that extraordinary results like these would lead Alan
Wurtzel to discuss the brilliant decisions he made. But when we asked
him to list the top five factors in his company's transformation, ranked by
importance, Wurtzel gave a surprising answer: The number one factor
was luck. "We were in a great industry, with the wind at our backs."
We pushed back, pointing out that we selected the good-to-great com
panies based on performance that surpassed their industry's average. Fur
thermore, the comparison company (Silo) was in the same industry, with
the same wind and probablybigger sails! We debated the point for a few
minutes, with Wurtzel continuing his preference for attributing much of
his success to just being in the right place at the right time. Later, when
asked to discuss the factors behind the enduring nature of the transforma
tion, he said,"The first thing that comesto mind isluck. ... I was luckyto
find the right successor."47
Luck. What an odd factor to talk about. Yet the good-to-great execu
tives talked a lot about luck in our interviews. In one interview with a
34 Jim Collins
Nucor executive, we asked why the company had such a remarkable
track record of good decisions; he responded: "I guess we were just
lucky."48 Joseph F. Cullman 3d, the Level 5 transition CEO of Philip
Morris, flat-out refused to take creditfor his company's success, attribut
ing hisgood fortune to having great colleagues, successors, and predeces
sors.49 Even the book he wrotea book he undertook at the urging ofhis
colleagues, which he never intended to distribute widely outside the
companyhad the unusual title Ym a Lucky Guy. The opening para
graph reads: "I was a very lucky guy from the very beginning of mylife:
marvelous parents, good genes, lucky in love, lucky in business, and
lucky when a Yale classmate had myorders changed to report to Wash
ington, D.C., in early 1941, instead of to a ship that was sunk with all
hands lostin the North Atlantic, lucky to be in the Navy, and lucky to be
alive at eighty-five."50
We were at first puzzled by this emphasis on good luck. After all, we
found no evidence that the good-to-great companies were blessed with
more good luck (or more bad luck, for that matter) than the comparison
companies. Then we began to notice a contrasting pattern in the compar
ison executives: They credited substantial blame to bad luck, frequendy
bemoaning the difficulties ofthe environment theyfaced.
Compare Bethlehem Steel to Nucor. Both companies operated in the
steel industry and produced hard-to-differentiate products. Both compa
nies faced the competitive challenge of cheap imported steel. Yet execu
tives at the two companies had completely different views of the same
environment. Bethlehem Steel's CEO summed up the company's prob
lems in 1983 byblaming imports: "Our first, second, and third problems
are imports."51 Ken Iverson and his crewat Nucor considered the same
challenge from imports a blessing, a stroke of good fortune ("Aren't we
lucky; steel is heavy, and theyhave to ship it all the way across the ocean,
giving us a huge advantage!"). Iverson saw the first, second, and third
problems facing the American steel industry not to be imports, but man
agement.52 He even went so far as to speak out publicly against govern
ment protection against imports, telling a stunned gathering of fellow
steel executives in 1977 that the real problems facing the American steel
industry lay in the fact that management had failed to keep pace with
innovation.53
The emphasis on luck turns out to be part of a pattern that wecame to
call the window and the mirror.
Good to Great 35
The comparison leaders did justthe opposite. They'd lookout the win
dow for something or someone outside themselves to blame for poor
results, but would preen in front of tlj,e mirrorand credit themselves when
things went well. Strangely, the window and the mirror do not reflect
objective reality. Everyone outside the window points inside, directly at
the Level 5 leader, saying, "He was the key; without his guidance and
leadership, wewould not have become a great company." Andthe Level 5
leader points right back out the window and says, "Look at all the great
peopleand good fortune thatmadethis possible; I'm a lucky guy." They're
both right, of course. Butthe Level 5s would never admitthat fact.
CULTIVATING LEVEL 5 LEADERSHIP
Not longago, I shared the Level 5finding with a gathering ofseniorexec
utives. A woman who had recently become chief executive of her com
pany raised her hand and said, "I believe what you say about the
good-to-great leaders. But I'm disturbed because when I look in the mir
ror, I know that I'm not Level 5, not yet anyway. Part of the reason I got
this job is because of myego drives. Are you tellingme that I can't make
this a greatcompanyif I'm not Level 5?"
"I don't know for certain that youabsolutely mustbe a Level 5 leader to
make yourcompany great," I replied. "I will simply pointbackto the data:
Of 1,435 companies that appeared on the Fortune 500 in our initial can
didate list, only eleven made the very tough cut into our study. In those
eleven, all of them had Level 5 leadership in key positions, including the
CEO, at the pivotal time of transition."
She sat there, quiet for moment, and you could tell everyone in the
roomwas mentally urgingher to ask the question. Finally, she said, "Can
you learn to become Level 5?"
36 J/772 Collins
Summary: The Two Sides of Level 5 Leadership
Professional Will Personal Humility
Creates superb results,a clear
catalystin the transition from
good to great.
Demonstrates an unwavering
resolve to do whatever must be
done to produce the bestlongterm
results, no matter how
difficult.
Sets the standard ofbuildingan
enduring great company; will
settlefor nothing less.
Looks in the mirror, not out
the window, to apportion
responsibility for poor results,
neverblamingother people,
external factors, or bad luck.
Demonstrates a compelling
modesty, shunning public
adulation; never boastful.
Acts with quiet, calm
determination; relies principally
on inspired standards, not
inspiringcharisma, to motivate.
Channels ambition into the
company, not the self; sets up
successors for even greater success
in the nextgeneration.
Looks out the window, not in the
mirror, to apportion credit for the
success of the companyto other
people, external factors, and good
luck.
Myhypothesis is that there are two categories of people: thosewho do
not have the seed ofLevel 5andthose who do. The first category consists
of people who could never in a million years bring themselves to subju
gate their egoistic needs to the greater ambition of building something
larger and more lasting than themselves. For these people, work will
always be first and foremost about what they getfame, fortune, adula
tion, power, whatevernot whatthey build, create, and contribute.
Good to Great 37
/*apjj^ V^,*  ^
The second category of peopleand I suspect the larger groupcon
sists of those who have the potential to evolve to Level 5; the capability
resides within them, perhaps buried or ignored, but there nonetheless.
And under the right circumstancesself-reflection, conscious personal
development, a mentor, a great teacher, loving parents, a significant life
experience, a Level 5 boss, or anynumberofotherfactorsthey beginto
develop.
In looking at the data, we noticed thatsome ofthe leaders in our study
had significant lifeexperiences that mighthave sparked or furthered their
maturation. Darwin Smith fully blossomed afterhis experience with can
cer. Joe Cullman was profoundly affected by his World War II experi
ences, particularly the last-minute change of orders that took him off a
doomed ship on which he surely would have died.54 Astrong religious
beliefor conversion mightalso nurturedevelopment ofLevel 5traits. Colman
Mockler, for example, converted to evangelical Christianity while
getting his MBA at Harvard, and later, according to the book Cutting
Edge, became a prime mover in a group of Boston business executives
who metfrequently over breakfast to discuss the carryover ofreligious val
ues to corporate life.55 Other leaders in our study, however, had no obvi
ous catalytic event; they just led normal lives andsomehow endedup atop
the Level 5 hierarchy.
I believealthough I cannot provethat potential Level 5 leaders are
highly prevalent in our society. The problem is not, in my estimation, a
dearth ofpotential Level 5 leaders. They exist all around us, ifwe just know
what to look for. And what is that? Look for situations where extraordinary
results exist but whereno individual steps forth to claim excess credit.You
will likely find a potential Level 5leader at work.
Foryourowndevelopment, I would love to be able to give youa list of
stepsfor becoming Level 5, but we have no solid research data that would
supporta credible list. Our research exposed Level 5 as a key component
inside the black box ofwhat it takes to shift a company from good to great.
Yet inside that black box is yet another black boxnamely, the inner
development ofa person to Level 5. We could speculate on what might be
38 Jim Collins
inside that inner black box, but it would mostly be justthatspeculation.
So, in short, Level 5 is a very satisfying idea, a powerful idea, and, to pro
duce the best transitions from good to great, perhaps an essential idea. A
"Ten-Step List to Level 5" wouldtrivialize the concept.
Mybest advice, based on the research, is to begin practicing the other
good-to-great disciplines we discovered. We found a symbiotic relation
ship betweenLevel 5and the remainingfindings. On the one hand, Level
5 traits enable you to implement the other findings; on the other hand,
practicingthe other findings helpsyouto become Level 5.Think of it this
way: This chapter isabout whatLevel 5sare; the rest of the bookdescribes
whattheydo. Leadingwiththe other disciplines can help youmovein the
right direction. There is no guarantee that doing so will turn you into a
full-fledged Level 5, but it gives you a tangible place to begin.
We cannot sayfor sure whatpercentageof people have the seed within,
or how many of those can nurture it. Even those of us who discovered
Level 5 on the research team do not know for ourselves whether we will
succeed in fully evolving to Level 5.Andyet, all of us who worked on the
finding have been deeply affected and inspired by the idea. Darwin
Smith, Colman Mockler, Alan Wurtzel, and all the other Level 5s we
learned about have become models for us, something worthy to aspire
toward. Whether or not we make it all the way to Level 5, it is worth the
effort. For like all basic truths about what is best in human beings, when
we catch a glimpse of that truth, we know that our own lives and all that
we touch will be the better for the effort.
LEVEL 5 LEADERSHIP
KEY POINTS
Eveiy gpo3-tp-great company had Level 5 leadership during the
pivotal transition years.
 "Level 5" refers to a five-level hierarchy of executive capabilities,
with Level 5 at the top. Level 5 leaders embody a paradoxical mix
ofpersonal humility and professional will. They are ambitious, to
be sure, but ambitious first and foremost for the company, not
themselves.
'Level 5 leaders set up their successors for even greater success in
the next? generation, whereas egocentric Level 4 leaders often set
Up their successors for failure.
Level 5leaders display a compelling modesty, areself-effacing and
understated. In contrast, two thirds of the comparison companies
had leaders with gargantuan personal egos that contributed to the
demise or continued mediocrity ofthe company.
\ Level 5 leaders are fanatically driven, infected with an incurable
needto produce sustained results. Theyareresolved to dowhatever
it takes to make the company great, no matter how bigor hard the
decisions.
 Level 5leaders display aworkmanlike diligencemore plow horse
.train show horse.
1Level 5 leaders look out the window to attribute success to factors
otherthan themselves. Whenthings gopoorly, however, theylook
in the mirror and blame themselves, taking full responsibility. The
compiarfeon CEQs often did justthe oppositethey looked in the
mirror to take credit for success, but out the window to assign
blamefor disappointing results.
' One ofthe most damaging trends in recent history isthe tendency
(especially by boards ofdirectors) to select dazzling, celebrity lead
ers and to de-select potential Level 5 leaders.
I believe that potential Level 5leaders exist allaroundus, ifwejust
know what to look for, and thatmany people have the potential to
evolve into Level 5.
40 Jim Collins
li^^ii^^^^ii
iiiifiiii^^
llilii
SilBlilSlll^HSllJllilPSplilill
lilfpS^lslIPlI
liBM^lii^li
iililiiiSlallllililllllilllili Iplllif8lll^(Sii|iBHSll
ffillltl
\& r .t'J
Level 5
Leadership!
C H A P T E R
I Confront the Hedgehog Culture of Technology
Brutal Facts Concept Discipline Accelerators
There are goingto be timeswhenwecan't waitfor somebody.
Now,you're either on the bus or offthe bus.
Ken Kesey,
from The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test
by Tom Wolfe1
'hV Vvhen we began the research project, we expected to find that the
first step in taking a company from good to great would be to set a new
direction, a new vision and strategy for the company, and then to get peo
ple committed and alignedbehind that newdirection.
We found something quite the opposite.
The executives who ignited the transformations from good to great did
not first figure out where to drive the bus and then get people to take it
there. No, they first got the right people on the bus (and the wrongpeople
offthe bus) and then figured out where to drive it. They said, in essence,
"Look,I don't reallyknowwhereweshould take this bus. But I knowthis
much: If we get the right people on the bus, the right people in the right
seats,and the wrong people offthe bus, then well figure out how to take it
someplace great."
42 Jim Collins
The good-to-great leaders understood three simple truths. First, if you
begin with "who," rather than "what," you can more easily adapt to a
changing world. If people join the bus primarily because of where it is
going, what happens if you get ten miles down the road and you need to
change direction? You've got a problem. But if people are on the bus
because ofwho else is on the bus, then it's much easier to change direc
tion: "Hey, I got on this bus because of who else is on it; if we need to
change direction to be more successful, fine with me." Second, if you
have the right people on the bus, the problem of how to motivate and
manage people largely goes away. The right people don't need to be
tightly managed or fired up; they will be self-motivated bythe inner drive
to produce the best results and to be part of creating something great.
Third, if you have the wrong people, it doesn't matter whether you dis
cover the right direction; you still won't have a great company. Great
vision withoutgreatpeople is irrelevant.
Consider the case of Wells Fargo. Wells Fargo began its fifteen-year
stint of spectacular performance in 1983,but the foundation for the shift
dates back to the early 1970s, when then-CEO Dick Cooley began build
ing one of the most talented management teams in the industry (the best
team, according to investor Warren Buffett).2 Cooley foresaw that the
banking industry would eventually undergo wrenching change, but he
did not pretend to know whatform that change would take. So instead of
mapping out a strategy for change, he and chairman Ernie Arbuckle
focused on "injecting an endless stream oftalent" directly into the veins of
the company. They hired outstanding people whenever and wherever
they found them,often without any specific job in mind. "That's how you
buildthe future," he said. "IfI'm notsmart enough toseethe changes that
are coming, theywill. And they'll be flexible enough to deal with them."3
Cooley's approach proved prescient. No one could predict all thechanges
that would be wrought bybanking deregulation. Yet when these changes
came,no bankhandledthose challenges betterthan Wells Fargo. Ata time
when itssector of the banking industry fell 59percent behind the general
stock market, Wells Fargo outperformed the market byoverthree times.4
Carl Reichardt, who became CEO in 1983, attributed the bank's suc
cess largely to the people around him, most of whom he inherited from
Cooley.5 As he listed members oftheWells Fargo executive team thathad
joined the company during the Cooley-Reichardt era, we were stunned.
Nearly every person had gone on to become CEO of a major company:
Good to Great 43
Bill Aldingerbecame the CEO of Household Finance, Jack Grundhofer
became CEO of U.S. Bancorp, Frank Newmanbecame CEO of Bankers
Trust, Richard Rosenberg became CEO of Bank of America, Bob Joss
became CEO of Westpac Banking (one of the largest banks in Australia)
and later became dean of the Graduate School of Business at Stanford
Universitynot exactly your garden variety executive team! Arjay Miller,
an active Wells Fargo board member for seventeen years, told us that the
Wells Fargo team reminded him of the famed "Whiz Kids" recruited to
Ford Motor Company in the late 1940s (of which Miller was a member,
eventually becoming president ofFord).6 Wells Fargo's approach was sim
ple:You get the best people, youbuild them into the best managers in the
industry, and you accept the fact that some of them will be recruited to
becomeCEOs of other companies.7
Bank of America took a very different approach. While Dick Cooley
systematically recruited the bestpeople he could get his hands on, Bankof
America, according to the book Breaking the Bank, followed something
called the "weak generals, strong lieutenants" model.8 If you pick strong
generals for key positions, their competitors will leave. But if you pick
weak generalsplaceholders, rather than highly capable executives
then the strong lieutenants are more likely to stickaround.
The weakgenerals model produced a climate very different at Bank of
America than the one at Wells Fargo. Whereas the Wells Fargo crewacted
as a strongteam of equal partners, ferociously debating eyeball-to-eyeball
in search of the best answers, the Bank of America weak generals would
wait for directions from above. Sam Armacost, who inherited the weak
generals model, described the managementclimate: "I came away quite
distressed from my first couple of management meetings. Not only
couldn't I get conflict, I couldn't even get comment. They were all wait
ing to see which way the wind blew."9
A retired Bank of America executive described senior managers in the
1970s as "Plastic People" who'd been trained to quietlysubmit to the dic
tates ofa domineering CEO.10 Later, after losing over $1 billion in the mid-
1980s, Bank ofAmerica recruited a gang ofstrong generals to turn the bank
around. Andwhere did it find those strong generals? From rightacross the
street at Wells Fargo. In fact, Bank of America recruited so many Wells
Fargo executives during its turnaround that people inside began to refer to
themselves as "Wells ofAmerica."11 At thatpoint, Bank ofAmerica began to
climb upward again, but it was too littletoo late. From 1973 to 1998, while
44 Jim Collins
Wells Fargo went from buildup to breakthrough results, Bank ofAmerica's
cumulative stock returns didn't even keep pace with the general market.
$80
$40
$20
1973
Wells Fargo versus Bank of America
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
January 1,1973 - January 1,1998
Wells Fargo Transition Point
Wells Fargo: $74.47
Bank of America: $15.60
1978 1983 1993
Now, you mightbe thinking, "That's justgood managementthe idea
of getting the right people around you. What's new about that?" On one
level, we have to agree; it is just plain old-fashioned good management.
Butwhat stands out with such distinction in the good-to-great companies
are two key points that madethem quite different.
"First who" is a very simple idea to grasp, and a very difficult idea to
doand most don't do it well. It's easy to talk about paying attention to
Good to Great 45
people decisions, but how manyexecutives have the discipline of David
Maxwell, who held offon developing a strategy until he gotthe right peo
ple in place, while the company was losing $1 million every single business
day with $56 billion of loans underwater? When Maxwell became CEO
of Fannie Mae during its darkest days, the board desperately wanted to
know how he was going to rescue the company. Despite the immense
pressure to act, to do something dramatic, to seize the wheeland startdri
ving, Maxwell focused first on getting the rightpeopleon the FannieMae
management team. His first act was to interview all the officers. He sat
them down and said, "Look, this is going to be a very hard challenge. I
want you to think about how demanding this is going to be. If you don't
think you're going to like it, that's fine. Nobody's going to hate you."12
Maxwell made it absolutely clear that there would only be seats for A
players who were going to putforth anA+ effort, andifyou weren't upfor
it, you had better get offthe bus, and get offnow.13 One executive who
had just uprooted his lifeand career to join Fannie Mae came to Maxwell
and said, "I listened to you very carefully, and I don't wantto do this." He
left andwent back to where he came from.14 In all, fourteen oftwenty-six
executives left the company, replaced by some of the best, smartest, and
hardest-working executives in the entire world of finance.15 The same
standard applied up and down the Fannie Mae ranks as managers at every
level increased the caliber oftheir teams and put immense peer pressure
upon each other, creating high turnover at first, when some people just
didn'tpanout.16 "We hada saying, *You can'tfake it at Fannie Mae,' " said
one executive team member. "Either you knew your stuffor you didn't,
and if you didn't, you'd justblowout of here."17
Wells Fargo and Fannie Mae both illustrate the idea that "who" ques
tions come before "what" questionsbefore vision, before strategy, before
tactics, before organizational structure, before technology. Dick Cooley
and David Maxwell both exemplified a classic Level 5 style when they
said, "I don'tknow where we should take this company, but I doknow that
if I start with the right people, ask them the right questions, and engage
them in vigorous debate, we will find a way to make this company great."
NOT A "GENIUS WITH A THOUSAND HELPERS"
In contrast to the good-to-great companies, which built deep and strong
executive teams, many of the comparison companies followed a "genius
46 Jim Collins
with a thousand helpers" model. In this model, the companyis a platform
for the talents of an extraordinary individual. In these cases, the towering
genius, the primary driving force in the company's success, isa greatasset
as long as the genius sticks around. The geniuses seldom build greatman
agement teams, for the simple reason that they don't need one, and often
don't want one. If you're a genius, you don't need a Wells Fargo-caliber
management team of people who could run their own shows elsewhere.
No, you justneed an army of good soldiers who can help implementyour
great ideas. However, when the genius leaves, the helpers areoften lost. Or,
worse, theytryto mimictheirpredecessor with bold,visionary moves (trying
to act like a genius, without being a genius) that prove unsuccessful.
Eckerd Corporation suffered the liability of a leader who had an
uncanny genius for figuring out "what" to do but little ability to assemble
the right "who" on the executive team. Jack Eckerd, blessed with monu
mental personal energy (he campaigned for governor of Florida while
running his company) and a genetic gift for market insight and shrewd
deal making, acquired his way from two little stores in Wilmington,
Delaware, to a drugstore empire of over a thousand stores spread across
the southeastern United States. By the late 1970s, Eckerd's revenues
equaledWalgreens', and it looked like Eckerd mighttriumph as the great
company in the industry. Butthen Jack Eckerd left to pursue his passion
for politics, running for senator and joining the Ford administration in
Washington. Without hisguiding genius, Eckerd's company began a long
decline, eventually being acquired by J. C. Penney.18
The contrast between Jack Eckerd and Cork Walgreen is striking.
Whereas Jack Eckerd had a genius for picking the right stores to buy,
Cork Walgreen had a genius for picking the right people to hire.19
Whereas Jack Eckerdhad a giftforseeing whichstores shouldgo in what
locations, CorkWalgreen had a gift for seeing whichpeopleshouldgo in
what seats. Whereas Jack Eckerd failed utterly at the single most impor
tant decision facing any executivethe selection of a successorCork
Walgreen developed multiple outstanding candidates and selected a
superstar successor, who may prove to be even better than Cork him
self.20 Whereas Jack Eckerd had no executive team, but instead a bunch
of capable helpers assembled to assist the great genius, Cork Walgreen
built the best executive team in the industry. Whereas the primaryguid
ance mechanism for Eckerd Corporation's strategy lay inside Jack Eck
erd's head, the primary guidance mechanism for Walgreens' corporate
Level 5 +
Management Team
(Good-to-Great Companies)
Level 5 Leader

First Who
Get the right people on the bus.
Build a superior executive team.
*
Then What
Once you have the right people
in place, figure out the best path
to greatness.
Good to Great 47
A "Genius with a
Thousand Helpers"
(Comparison Companies)
Level 4 Leader
\
First What
Set a vision for where to drive
the bus. Develop a road map
for driving the bus.
*
Then Who
Enlista crew of highly capable
"helpers" to make the vision
happen.
strategy lay in the group dialogue and shared insights of the talented
executive team.
The "genius with a thousand helpers" model isparticularly prevalent in
the unsustained comparison companies. The most classic case comes
from a man known as the Sphinx, Henry Singleton ofTeledyne. Single
ton grew up on a Texas ranch, with the childhood dream of becoming a
great businessman in the model ofthe rugged individualist. Armed with a
Ph.D. from MIT, he founded Teledyne.21 The name Teledyne derives
from Greek and means "force applied at a distance"an aptname, as the
central force holding the far-flung empire together was Henry Singleton
himself.
Through acquisitions, Singleton builtthe company from a small enter
prise to number 293 on the Fortune 500 list in six years.22 Within ten
years, he'd completed more than 100 acquisitions, eventually creating a
far-flung enterprise with 130 profit centers in everything from exotic met
als to insurance.23 Amazingly, the whole system worked, with Singleton
48 Jim Collins
1967
Teledyne Corporation
A Classic "Genius with a Thousand Helpers''
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market,
January 1,1967-January 1,1996
End of Singleton Era
Decline after
the Genius Departs
1970 1980 1990 1996
himself acting asthe glue that connected all the moving parts together. At
one point, he said, "I define my job as having the freedom to do what
seems to me to be in the best interest of the company at any time."24 A
1978 Forbes feature story maintained, "Singleton will win no awards for
humility, but who can avoid standing in awe of his impressive record?"
Singleton continued to run the company well into his seventies, with no
serious thought given to succession. After all,why worry aboutsuccession
whenthe very pointofthe whole thingisto serve asa platform to leverage
the talents ofyour remarkable genius? "Ifthere isa single weakness in this
otherwise brilliant picture/7 the article continued, "it is this: Teledyne is
not so much a system as it is the reflection of one man's singular disci
pline."25
What a weakness it turned out to be. Once Singleton stepped away
from day-to-day management in the mid-1980s, the far-flung empire
began to crumble. From the endof 1986 until its merger with Allegheny
in 1995, Teledyne's cumulative stock returns imploded, falling 66 percent
behind the general stock market. Singleton achieved hischildhood dream
ofbecoming a great businessman, buthe failed utterly at the task ofbuild
ing a great company.
Good to Great 49
IT'S WHO YOU PAY, NOT HOW YOU PAY THEM
We expected to find that changes in incentive systems, especially execu
tive incentives, would be highly correlated with making the leap from
good to great. With all the attention paid to executive compensationthe
shift to stock options and the huge packages that have become common
placesurely, we thought, the amount and structure of compensation
must play a key role in going from good to great. How else doyou getpeo
ple to do the rightthings that create great results?
Weweredead wrong in our expectations.
We fojund, no systematic pattern linking executive compensation to
i \k pr^efeaolgoicigirorri,goodrto great Jhe:^videriee pimply dos
rv ft|^s#|p^ steuctuFe of executive *mm~
~|fe|sati&n 4cis,ajs $4cey lever in taking a cokipany jrem good to
We spent weeks inputting compensation data from proxy statements
and performed 112 separate analyses looking for patterns and correla
tions. We examined everything we could quantify for the top five offi
cerscash versus stock, long-term versus short-term incentives, salary
versus bonus, and so forth. Some companies used stock extensively; oth
ers didn't. Some had high salaries; others didn't. Some made significant
use of bonus incentives; others didn't. Most importantly, when we ana
lyzed executive compensation patterns relative to comparison companies,
we found no systematic differences on the use of stock (or not), high
salaries (or not), bonus incentives (or not), or long-term compensation
(or not). The only significant difference we found was that the good-togreat
executives received slightly less total cash compensation ten years
after the transition than their counterparts at the still-mediocre compari
son companies!26
Not that executive compensation is irrelevant. You have to be basically
rational and reasonable (I doubt that Colman Mockler, DavidMaxwell, or
Darwin Smith would have worked for free), and the good-to-great compa
nies did spend time thinking about the issue. Butonce you've structured
something that makes basic sense, executive compensation falls away as a
distinguishing variable in moving an organization from good to great.
50 Jim Collins
Whymight that be? It is simply a manifestation of the "first who" prin
ciple: It's nothow you compensate your executives, it's which executives you
have to compensate in the first place. If you have the right executives on
the bus, they will do everything within their power to build a greatcom
pany, not because of what they will "get" for it, but because they simply
cannot imagine settling for anything less. Their moral code requires
buildingexcellence for its own sake, and you're no more likely to change
that witha compensation package than you'relikely to affect whether they
breathe. The good-to-great companies understood a simple truth: The
right people will do the right things and deliver the best results they're
capableof, regardless ofthe incentive system.
ifSliP^?^ 3
We were not able to look as rigorously at nonexecutive compensation;
such data is not available in as systematic a format as proxy statements for
top officers. Nonetheless, evidence from source documents and articles
suggests thatthe same idea applies at all levels ofan organization.27
Aparticularly vivid example is Nucor. Nucor built its entire system on
the ideathat you can teachfarmers how to make steel, but youcan't teach
a farmer work ethic to people who don't have it in the first place. So,
instead of setting up mills in traditional steel towns like Pittsburgh and
Gary, it located its plants in places like Crawfordsville, Indiana; Norfolk,
Nebraska; and Plymouth, Utahplaces full of real farmers whogo to bed
early, rise at dawn, and get rightto work without fanfare. "Gotta milk the
cows" and "Gonna plow the northforty before noon"translated easily into
"Gotta roll some sheet steel" and "Gonna cast forty tons before lunch."
Nucor ejected people who did not share this work ethic, generating as
high as 50 percent turnover in the first year ofa plant, followed byvery low
turnover as the right people settled in for the long haul.28
To attract and keep the best workers, Nucor paid its steelworkers more
than any other steel company in the world. But it built its pay system
around a high-pressure team-bonus mechanism, withover 50percent of a
Good to Great 51
worker's compensation tied directly to the productivity ofhiswork teamof
twenty to forty people.29 Nucorteam members would usually show up for
work thirty minutes early to arrange their tools and prepare to blast offthe
starting linethe instant the shift gunfired.30 "We have the hardest working
steel workers in the world," said one Nucor executive. "We hire five, work
themlike ten, and pay themlike eight."31
The Nucor system did not aim to turn lazy people into hard workers,
but to createan environment where hardworking peoplewouldthrive and
lazy workers would either jump or get thrown right off the bus. In one
extreme case, workers chased a lazy teammate right out of the plant with
an angle iron.32
Nucor illustrates a key point. In determining "the right people," the
good-to-great companies placed greater weight on character attributes
than on specific educational background, practical skills, specialized
knowledge, or work experience. Not that specific knowledge or skills are
unimportant, but they viewed these traits as more teachable (or at least
learnable), whereas they believed dimensions like character, work ethic,
basic intelligence, dedication to fulfilling commitments, and values are
more ingrained. As Dave Nassefof PitneyBowes put it:
I used to be in the Marines,and the Marinesget a lot of credit for build
ing people's values. But that's not the way it really works. The Marine
Corps recruits people who share the corps' values, then provides them
with the training required to accomplish the organization's mission. We
look at it the same wayat Pitney Bowes. We have more people who want
to do the right thing than mostcompanies. Wedon't just look at experi
ence. We want to know: Who are they? Why are they?We find out who
they are by asking them why they made decisions in their life. The
answers to thesequestions give us insight into their corevalues.33
One good-to-great executive said that his best hiring decisions often
came from people with no industry or business experience. In one case,
52 Jim Collins
he hired a manager who'd been captured twice duringthe Second World
Warand escaped both times. "I thought that anyone who could do that
shouldn't have trouble with business."34
RIGOROUS, NOT RUTHLESS
The good-to-great companies probably sound like tough places to work
and they are. Ifyou don't have what it takes, you probably won'tlast long.
But they're not ruthless cultures, they're rigorous cultures. And the dis
tinction is crucial.
To be ruthless means hacking and cutting, especially in difficult times,
or wantonly firing people without anythoughtful consideration. To be rig
orous meansconsistently applying exacting standards at all timesand at all
levels, especially in upper management. To be rigorous, not ruthless,
means that the best people need not worry about their positions and can
concentrate fullyon their work.
In 1986, Wells Fargo acquiredCrockerBankand planned to shed gobs
of excess cost in the consolidation. There's nothing unusual about that
every bank merger in the era of deregulation aimed to cut excess cost out
of a bloated and protected industry. However, what was unusual about the
Wells-Crocker consolidation is the way Wells integrated management or,
to be more accurate, the way it didn't even try to integrate most Crocker
managementinto the Wells culture.
The Wells Fargo team concludedrightup frontthat the vast majority of
Crocker managers wouldbe the wrong peopleon the bus. Crocker people
had long been steeped in the traditions and perks of old-style banker cul
ture, complete with a marbled executive dining room with its own chef
and $500,000 worth of china.35 Quite a contrast to the spartan culture at
Wells Fargo, wheremanagementate food preparedbya collegedormitory
food service.36 Wells Fargo made it clearto the Crocker managers: "Look,
this is not a mergerof equals; it'san acquisition; webought your branches
and your customers; we didn't acquire you/7 Wells Fargo terminated most
of the Crocker management team1,600 Crocker managers gone on day
oneincluding nearly all the topexecutives.37
Acritic might say, "That's justthe Wells people protecting their own."
But consider the following fact: Wells Fargo also sent some of its own
managers packing in cases where the Crocker managers were judged as
better qualified. When it came to management, the Wells Fargo stanGood
to Great 53
dards were ferocious and consistent. Like a professional sports team, only
the best made the annual cut, regardless of position or tenure. Summed
up one Wells Fargo executive: "The only way to deliver to the people
who are achieving is to not burden them with the people who are not
achieving."38
On the surface, this looks ruthless. But the evidence suggests that the
average Crocker manager was just not the same caliber as the average
Wells manager and would have failed in the Wells Fargo performance
culture. If they weren't going to make it on the bus in the long term, why
let them suffer in the short term? One senior Wells Fargo executive told
us: "We all agreed this was an acquisition, not a merger, and there's no
sensebeatingaround the bush, not beingstraightforward with people.We
decided it would be best to simply do it on day one. We planned our
efforts so that we could say, right up front, 'Sorry, we don't see a role for
you,' or Yes, we do see a role; you have a job, so stop worrying about it.'
We were not going to subject our culture to a death by a thousand
cuts.' "39
To let people languish in uncertaintyfor months or years, stealing pre
cious time in their lives that theycould use to move on to something else,
when in the end they aren't goingto makeit anywaythat wouldbe ruth
less. To deal with it right up front and let people get on with their lives
that is rigorous.
Not that the Crocker acquisition is easy to swallow. It's never pleasant
to see thousands of peoplelose their jobs, but the era ofbank deregulation
saw hundreds of thousands of lost jobs. Given that, it's interesting to note
two points. First, Wells Fargo did fewer big layoffs than its comparison
company, Bank of America.40 Second, upper management, including
someseniorWells Fargo upper management, suffered more on a percent
age basis than lower-level workers in the consolidation.41 Rigor in a goodto-
great company applies first at the top, focused on those who hold the
largestburden of responsibility.
To be rigorous in people decisions meansfirst becoming rigorous about
top management people decisions. Indeed, I fear that people might use
"first who rigor" as an excuse for mindlessly chopping out people to
improve performance. "It's hard to do, but we've got to be rigorous," I can
hear them say. And I cringe. For not only will a lot of hardworking, good
people get hurt in the process, but the evidence suggests that such tactics
are contrary to producing sustained great results. The good-to-great com
panies rarelyused head-count lopping as a tactic and almost never used it
54 Jim Collins
asa primary strategy. Even in the Wells Fargo case, the companyused lay
offs halfas much as Bank ofAmerica duringthe transition era.
In contrast, we found layoffs used five times more frequently in the
comparison companies than in the good-to-great companies. Some of the
comparison companies had an almost chronic addiction to layoffs and
restructurings.42
It would be a mistakea tragic mistake, indeedtothink that the way
you ignite a transition from good to great is by wantonly swinging the ax
on vast numbers of hardworking people. Endlessrestructuringand mind
less hacking were neverpart ofthe good-to-great model.
How to Be Rigorous
We'veextracted three practicaldisciplines fromthe researchfor being rig
orous rather than ruthless.
Practical Discipline #1:When in doubt, don't hirekeep looking.
One of the immutable laws of management physics is "Packard's Law."
(So called because we first learned it in a previous research project from
David Packard, cofounderof the Hewlett-Packard Company.) It goes like
this: No company can grow revenues consistently faster than its ability to
getenough ofthe rightpeople to implementthat growth and still become
a great company. If your growth rate in revenues consistently outpaces
yourgrowth rate in people, yousimply will notindeed cannotbuild a
great company.
Good to Great 55
The management team at Circuit City instinctively understood
Packard's Law. Driving around Santa Barbara the day after Christmas a
few years ago, I noticed something different about the CircuitCity store.
Other stores had signs and banners reaching outtocustomers: "Always the
Best Prices" or "Great After-Holiday Deals" or "Best After-Christmas
Selection," and so forth. But not Circuit City. It had a banner that read:
"Always Looking for Great People."
The sign reminded meofourinterview with Walter Bruckart, vice pres
ident during the good-to-great years. When asked to name the top five
factors that led to the transition from mediocrity to excellence, Bruckart
said, "One would be people. Two would be people. Three would be peo
ple. Four would be people. And five would be people. Ahuge partofour
transition can be attributed to our discipline in picking the right people."
Bruckart then recalled a conversation with CEO Alan Wurtzel during a
growth spurt at Circuit City: " 'Alan, I'm really wearing down trying to
find the exact right person to fill this position or that position. At what
point do I compromise?' Without hesitation, Alan said, You don't com
promise. We find another way to get through until we find the right
people.' "43
One of the key contrasts between Alan Wurtzel at Circuit City and Sid
ney Cooper at Silo is that Wurtzel spent the bulk of his time in the early
years focused on getting the right people on the bus, whereas Cooper
spent 80 percent ofhis time focusing ontheright stores tobuy.44 Wurtzel's
first goal was to buildthe best, most professional management teamin the
industry; Cooper'sfirst goal was simply to grow as fast as possible. Circuit
City put tremendous emphasis on getting the right people all up and
down the line, from delivery drivers to vice presidents; Silo developed a
reputation fornot beingableto dothe basics, like making home deliveries
without damaging the products.45 According to Circuit City's Dan
Rexinger, "We made the best home delivery drivers in the industry. We
told them, Tou are the last contact the customer has with Circuit City.
Weare going to supply you with uniforms. Wewill require that you shave,
that you don't have B.O. You're going to be professional people.' The
change in the way we handled customers when making a delivery was
absolutely incredible. We would get thank-you notes backon howcourte
ous the drivers were."46 Fiveyears into Wurtzel's tenure, Circuit City and
Silo had essentially the same business strategy (the same answers to the
"what" questions), yet Circuit City took offlike a rocket, beating the gen
eral stockmarket 18.5 to 1 in the fifteen years after its transition,while Silo
56 Jim Collins
bumped along until it was finally acquired by a foreign company.47 Same
strategy, different people,different results.
Practical Discipline #2: When you know you need to make a people
change, act.
The moment you feel the need to tightly manage someone, you've made
a hiring mistake. The best people don't need to be managed. Guided,
taught, ledyes. But not tightly managed. We've all experienced or
observed the following scenario. We have a wrong person on the busand
we know it. Yet we wait, we delay, we try alternatives, we give a third and
fourth chance, we hope thatthe situation will improve, we invest time in
trying to properly manage the person, we build little systems to compen
sate for his shortcomings, andso forth. Butthe situation doesn't improve.
When we go home, we find ourenergy diverted by thinking (or talking to
our spouses) about that person. Worse, all the time and energy we spend
on that one person siphons energy away from developing and working
with all the right people. We continue to stumble along until the person
leaves on hisown (to ourgreat sense ofrelief) orwe finally act (also to our
great sense of relief). Meanwhile, our best people wonder, "What took
you so long?"
Letting the wrong people hang around is unfair to all the right people,
as they inevitably find themselves compensating for the inadequacies of
the wrong people. Worse, it can drive away the best people. Strong per
formers are intrinsically motivated by performance, and when they see
their efforts impeded by carrying extra weight, they eventually become
frustrated.
Waiting too long before acting is equally unfair to the people who
need to get offthe bus. Forevery minute you allow a person to continue
holding a seat when you know that person will not make it in the end,
you're stealing a portion of his life, time that he could spend finding a
better place where he could flourish. Indeed, if we're honest with our
selves, the reason wewait too long often has less to do with concern for
that person and more to do with our own convenience. He's doing an
okay job and it would be a huge hassle to replace him, so we avoid the
issue. Or we find the wholeprocess of dealingwith the issue to be stress
ful and distasteful. So, to save ourselves stress and discomfort, we wait.
And wait. And wait. Meanwhile, all the best people are still wondering,
"When arethey going todosomething about this? How longisthis going
to go on?"
Good to Great 57
Using data from Moody's Company Information Reports, we were able
to examine the pattern of turnover in the top management levels. We
found no difference in the amount of"churn" (turnover within a period of
time) between the good-to-great and the comparison companies. But we
did find differences in the pattern of churn.48
$pe gdojKo-great companies showed the following bipolar pattern at
=the fop management level: Peopleeither stayed on the bus for a long
vitirne or got off the bus in a hurry. In other Words, the good-to-great
 ^eoniparSles did notehurn more,fheychurned defer. ; <\
The good-to-great leaders did not pursue an expedient "trya lot of peo
ple and keep who works" model of management. Instead, they adopted
the following approach: "Let's take the time to make rigorous A+ selec
tions rightup front. If we get it right, we'll do everything we can to try to
keep them on boardfora longtime. Ifwemake a mistake, then we'llcon
front that fact sothatwe can geton with our work and theycan geton with
their lives."
The good-to-great leaders, however, would not rush to judgment.
Often, they invested substantial effort in determining whether they had
someone in the wrong seat before concluding that they had the wrong
person on the bus entirely. When Colman Mockler became CEO of
Gillette, he didn'tgoon a rampage, wantonly throwing people out the win
dows ofa moving bus. Instead, he spent fully 55 percent ofhis timeduring
his first two years in office jiggering around with the management team,
changing or moving thirty-eight of the top fifty people. Said Mockler,
"Every minute devoted to putting the proper person in the proper slot is
worth weeks oftime later."49 Similarly, Alan Wurtzel ofCircuitCity sentus
a letterafterreading an early draft ofthischapter, wherein he commented:
Your point about "getting the right people on the bus" as compared to
othercompanies isdeadon.There isonecorollary that isalso important.
I spent a lot of time thinking and talking about who sits where on the
bus. I called it "putting square pegs in square holes and round pegs in
round holes." ... Instead of firing honest and able people who are not
performing well, it is important to tryto movethem once or even two or
three times to other positions where theymightblossom.
58 Jim Collins
But how do you know when you know? Two key questions can help.
First, if it werea hiring decision (ratherthan a "should this person get off
the bus?" decision), would you hire the personagain? Second, if the per
son came to tell you that he or she is leaving to pursue an exciting new
opportunity, would youfeel terribly disappointed or secretiy relieved?
Practical Discipline #3:Putyour best people onyour biggest opportunities, not
your biggest problems.
In the early 1960s, R.J. Reynolds and PhilipMorris derived the vast major
ityof their revenues from the domestic arena. R.J. Reynolds' approachto
international business was, "If somebody out there in the world wants a
Camel, let them call us."50 Joe Cullman at Philip Morris had a different
view. He identified international markets asthe single bestopportunity for
long-term growth, despite the fact that the company derived less than 1
percent of its revenues from overseas.
Cullman puzzled overthe best "strategy" for developing international
operations and eventually came up with a brilliant answer: It was not a
"what"answer, but a "who." He pulled his number one executive, George
Weissman, off the primary domestic business, and put him in charge of
international. At the time, international amounted to almost nothinga
tiny exportdepartment, a struggling investment in Venezuela, another in
Australia, and a tiny operation in Canada. "When Joe put George in
charge of international, a lot of people wondered what George had done
wrong," quipped oneofWeissman's colleagues.51 "I didn'tknow whether
I was being thrown sideways, downstairs or out the window," said Weiss
man. "Here I was running 99% of the company and the next day I'd be
running 1% or less."52
Yet, asForbes magazine observed twenty years later, Cullman's decision
to move Weissman to the smallest part of the business was a stroke of
genius. Urbane and sophisticated, Weissman was the perfect person to
develop markets like Europe, and he built international into the largest
and fastest-growing part of the company. In fact, under Weissman's stewGood
to Great 59
ardship, Marlboro became the best-selling cigarette in the world three
years before it became number onein the United States.53
The RJR versus Philip Morris case illustrates a common pattern. The
good-to-great companies madea habit ofputtingtheir bestpeopleon their
best opportunities, not their biggest problems. The comparison compa
nies had a penchant for doing just the opposite, failing to grasp the fact
that managing your problems can onlymake you good, whereas building
your opportunities is the only way to become great.
th^se r?tt!e^efete.0f change. If you creates place where Ihe best
^han&esjrt direction. . 
For instance, when Kimberly-Clark sold the mills, Darwin Smith made
it clear: The company might be getting rid of the paper business, but it
would keep itsbest people. "Manyof our people had come up through the
paper business. Then, all of a sudden, the crown jewels are being sold off
and they're asking, 'What is myfuture?' " explained Dick Auchter. "And
Darwin would say, We need all the talented managers we can get. We
keepthem.' "54 Despite the fact that theyhad little or no consumer expe
rience, Smith moved all the best paper people to the consumer business.
We interviewed Dick Appert, a senior executive who spent the majority
of his career in the papermaking division at Kimberly-Clark, the same
division soldoffto createfunds forthe company's bigmoveinto consumer
products. He talked with pride and excitement about the transformation
of Kimberly-Clark, how it had the guts to sell the paper mills, how it had
the foresight to exit the paper business and throw the proceeds into the
consumer business, and how it had taken on Procter & Gamble. "I never
had any argument with our decision to dissolve the paper division of the
company," he said. "We did get rid of the paper mills at that time, and I
was in absolute agreement with that."55 Stop and think about that for a
moment. The right people want to be part of building something great,
and Dick Appert saw that Kimberly-Clark could become great by selling
the part of the company where he had spent most of his working life.
The Philip Morris and Kimberly-Clark cases illustrate a final point
60 Jim Collins
about "the right people." We noticed a Level 5 atmosphere at the top
executive level of every good-to-great company, especially during the key
transition years. Not that every executive on the team became a fully
evolved Level 5 leader to the same degree as Darwin Smith or Colman
Mockler, but each core member of the team transformed personal ambi
tion into ambition forthe company. This suggests that the team members
had Level 5 potentialor at least they were capable of operating in a
manner consistent with the Level 5 leadership style.
You might be wondering, "What's the difference between a Level 5
executive team member and justbeing a good soldier?" ALevel 5 execu
tive team memberdoes not blindly acquiesce to authority and is a strong
leader in her own right, so driven and talented that she builds her arena
into one of the very best in the world. Yet each team member must also
have the ability to meldthat strength intodoing whatever it takes to make
the company great.
Anarticle on Philip Morris said ofthe Cullman era, "These guys never
agreed on anything and they would argue about everything, and they
would kill each other and involve everyone, high and low, talented peo
ple. But when they had to make a decision, the decision would emerge.
This made Philip Morris."56 No matter how much they argued, said a
Philip Morrisexecutive, "theywerealways in search of the best answer. In
the end, everybody stood behind the decision. All of the debates were for
the commongood ofthe company, not yourowninterests."57
FIRST WHO, GREAT COMPANIES,
AN D A GREAT LI FE
Whenever I teach the good-to-great findings, someone almost always
raises the issue of the personal cost in making a transition from good to
Good to Great 61
great. In otherwords, isit possible to build a great company and also build
a greatlife?
Yes.
The secretto doingso lies right in this chapter.
I spenta few short days with a senior Gillette executive and his wife at
an executive conference in HongKong. Duringthe course of our conver
sations, I asked them if they thought Colman Mockler, the CEO most
responsible for Gillette's transition from good to great, had a great life.
Colman's life revolved around three great loves, they told me: his family,
Harvard, and Gillette. Even during the darkest and most intense times of
the takeover crises of the 1980s and despite the increasingly global nature
of Gillette's business, Mockler maintained remarkable balance in his life.
He did not significantly reduce the amountoftime he spentwith hisfam
ily, rarely working evenings or weekends. He maintained his disciplined
worship practices. He continued his active work on the governing board
of Harvard College.58
When I asked how Mockler accomplished all of this, the executive
said, "Oh, it really wasn't that hard for him. He was so good at assem
bling the right people around him, and putting the right people in the
right slots, that he just didn't need to be there all hours of the day and
night. That was Colman's whole secret to success and balance." The
executive went on to explain that he was just as likely to meet Mockler
in the hardware store as at the office. "He really enjoyed puttering
around the house, fixing things up. He always seemed to find time to
relaxthat way." Then the executive's wife added, "When Colman died
and we all went to the funeral, I looked around and realized how much
love was in the room. This was a man who spent nearly all his waking
hours with people who loved him, who loved what they were doing,
and who loved one anotherat work, at home, in his charitable work,
wherever."
Andthe statementranga bell forme, as there was somethingabout the
good-tb-great executive teams that I couldn't quite describe, but that
clearly set them apart. In wrappingup our interviewwith George Weiss
man of Philip Morris, I commented, "When you talk about your time at
the company, it's as ifyou are describing a love affair." He chuckled and
said, "Yes. Other than my marriage, it was the passionate love affair of
my life. I don't think many people would understand what I'm talking
about, but I suspect my colleagues would." Weissman and many of his
executive colleagues kept offices at Philip Morris, coming in on a regu62
Jim Collins
lar basis, long after retirement. A corridor at the Philip Morris world
headquarters is called "the hall of the wizards of was."59 It's the corridor
where Weissman, Cullman, Maxwell, and others continue to come into
the office, in large part because they simply enjoy spending time
together. Similarly, DickAppertof Kimberly-Clark said in his interview,
"I neverhad anyone in Kimberly-Clark in all myforty-one years say any
thing unkind to me. I thank God the day I was hired because I've been
associated with wonderful people. Good, good people who respected
and admired one another."60
Members of the good-to-great teams tended to become and remain
friends for life. In many cases, they are still in close contact with each
otheryears or decades after working together. It was striking to hear them
talk about the transition era, for no matter how dark the days or how big
the tasks, these people had fun! Theyenjoyed each other's company and
actually looked forward to meetings. Anumber of the executives charac
terized their years on the good-to-great teams as the high point of their
lives. Their experiences went beyond just mutual respect (which they cer
tainly had), to lasting comradeship.
Adherence to the ideaof"first who" mightbe the closest link between a
great companyand a great life.For no matter whatweachieve, ifwe don't
spend the vast majority of our time with people we love and respect, we
cannot possibly have a greatlife. But ifwespend the vast majority of our
time with people we love andrespectpeople we really enjoy being on the
buswith and who will never disappoint usthen wewill almost certainly
have a great life, no matter where the bus goes. The people we inter
viewed from the good-to-great companies clearly loved what they did,
largely becausethey loved whothey did it with.
FIRST WHO . . . THEN WHAT
KEY POINTS
The good-to-great leaders began the transformation byfirst getting
the right people onthebus (and the wrong people off the bus) and
then figured out where to drive it
The key pointofthis chapter isnot just the idea ofgetting the right
people on the team. The key point is that "who'' questions come
before "what" decisionsbefore vision, before strategy, before
organization structure, before tactics. First who, then whatas a
rigorous discipline, consistently applied.
The comparison companies frequently followed the "genius with a
thousand helpers" modela genius leader who sets a vision and
then enlists a crewof highly capable "helpers" to make the vision
happen. This model fails when the genius departs.
The good-to-great leaders were rigorous, not ruthless, in people
decisions. They did not rely on layoffs and restructuring as a pri
mary strategy for improving performance. The comparison compa
nies used layoffs to a much greater extent.
Weuncovered three practical disciplines forbeing rigorous in peo
ple decisions:
1. When in doubt, don't hirekeep looking. (Corollary: A com
panyshould limit its growth based on its ability to attract enough
of the right people.)
2. Whenyou know you needtomake a people change, act (Corol
lary: Firstbe sureyoudon't simply have someone in the wrong
seat.)
3. Put your best people on your biggest opportunities, not your
biggest problems. (Corollary: Ifyou sell offyourproblems, don't
sell offyour best people.)
Good-to-great management teams consist of people who debate
vigorously in search ofthe bestanswers, yetwho unify behind deci
sions, regardless of parochial interests.
64 Jim Collins
UNEXPECTED.FINDINGS
We found nosystematic pattern linking executive compensation to
theshift from good togreatThepurpose ofcompensation isnotto
"motivate" the right beliaviors from the wrong people, butto get
andkeep the right people in the first place.
The old ad^ge "People are your most important asset* is.wrong.
People arernot your most important assetThe right people are*
Whether someone is the "right person" has moreto do with char
acter traits and inflate capabilities than with specific knowledge,
background, orskills. ,
C HA P T E R
Level 5 First Who. .
Leadership Then What
Hedgehog Culture of Technology
Concept Discipline Accelerators
There isno worse mistake in publicleadership than to hold
out false hopes soonto be swept away.
Winston S. Churchill,
TheHinge of Fate1
n the early 1950s, the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company, com
monly known as A&P, stood as the largest retailing organization in the
world and one of the largest corporations in the United States, at one
point ranking behind only General Motors in annual sales.2 Kroger, in
contrast, stood asan unspectacular grocery chain, less than half the sizeof
A&P, with performance that barely keptpace with the general market.
Then in the 1960s, A&P began to falter while Kroger began to lay the
foundations for a transition into a great company. From 1959 to 1973,
both companies lagged behind the market, with Kroger pulling just a bit
ahead of A&P. After that, the two companies completely diverged, and
over the next twenty-five years, Kroger generated cumulative returns ten
times the market and eighty times better than A&P.
Howdid such a dramatic reversal offortunes happen? Andhowcould a
company as great asA&Pbecome so awful?
66 Jim Collins
1959
Kroger, A&P, and the Market
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1959-1973
1966
Notes:
1. Kroger transition point occurred in 1973.
2. Chart shows value of $1 invested on January 1,1959.
3. Cumulative returns, dividends reinvested, to January 1,1973.
$200
$150
$100
1973
Kroger, A&P, and the Market
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1973-1998
1985
Notes:
1. Kroger transition point occurred in 1973.
2. Chart shows value of $1 invested on January 1,1973.
3. Cumulative returns, dividends reinvested, to January 1,1998.
General Market:
$3.42
Kroger $1.26
A&P: $0.64
1973
Kroger: $198.47
Good to Great 67
A&P had a perfect model for the first half of the twentieth century,
when two world wars and a depression imposed frugality upon Ameri
cans: cheap, plentiful groceries sold in utilitarian stores. But in the afflu
ent second half of the twentieth century, Americans changed. They
wanted nicer stores, bigger stores, more choices in stores. They wanted
fresh-baked bread, flowers, health foods, cold medicines, fresh produce,
forty-five choices of cereal, and ten types of milk. They wanted offbeat
items, like five different types of expensive sprouts and various concoc
tionsof protein powder and Chinese healingherbs. Oh, and they wanted
to be able to do their banking and get their annual flu shots while shop
ping. In short, they no longerwanted grocery stores. They wanted Super
stores, with a big block "S" on the chestoffering almost everything
under one roof, with lots of parking, cheap prices, clean floors, and a
gazillion checkout lines.
Now, right off the bat, you might be thinking: "Okay, so the story of
A&P is one of an aging company that had a strategy that was right for the
times, but the times changed andthe world passed itbyasyounger, betterattuned
companies gave customers more of whatthey wanted. What's so
interestingabout that?"
Here's what's interesting: Both Kroger and A&P were old companies
(Kroger at 82 years, A&P at 111 years) headinginto the 1970s; both com
panies had nearly all their assets invested in traditional grocery stores; both
companies had strongholds outside the majorgrowth areas of the United
States; and both companies hadknowledge ofhow the world aroundthem
was changing. Yet one of these two companies confronted the brutal facts
of reality head-on and completely changed its entire system in response;
the other stuck its head in the sand.
In 1958, Forbes magazine described A&P as "the Hermit Kingdom,"
run asan absolute monarchy byan aging prince.3 Ralph Burger, the suc
cessor to the Hartford brothers who had builttheA&P dynasty, sought to
preserve two things above all else: cash dividends for the family founda
tion and the past glory of the Hartford brothers. According to one A&P
director, Burger "considered himselfthe reincarnation of old John Hart
ford, even to the point of wearing a flower in his lapel every day from
Hartford's greenhouse. He tried to carry out, against all opposition, what
he thought Mr. John [Hartford] would have liked."4 Burger instilled a
"whatwould Mr. Hartford do?" approach to decisions, living bythe motto
"You can't argue with a hundred years of success."5 Indeed, through
68 Jim Collins
Burger, Mr. Hartford continued to be the dominant force on the board
for nearly twenty years. Never mindthe factthat he was already dead.6
As the brutal facts about the mismatchbetween its past model and the
changing world began to pile up, A&P mounted an increasingly spirited
defense against those facts. In one series of events, the companyopened a
new store called The Golden Key, a separate brand wherein it could
experiment with new methods and models to learn what customers
wanted.7 It sold noA&P-branded products, it gave the store manager more
freedom, it experimented with innovative newdepartments, and it began
to evolve toward the modern superstore. Customers really liked it. Here,
rightunder their noses, theybegan to discover the answer to the questions
ofwhy they were losing market share and whatthey could do about it.
What did A&Pexecutives do withThe Golden Key?
Theydidn'tlike the answers that it gave, sothey closed it.8
A&P then began a pattern of lurching from one strategy to another,
always looking for a single-stroke solution to its problems. It held pep ral
lies, launched programs, grabbed fads, fired CEOs, hiredCEOs, and fired
them yetagain. It launchedwhat one industry observer called a "scorched
earth policy," a radical price-cutting strategy to build market share, but
never dealt with the basic fact that customerswanted not lower prices, but
different stores.9 The price cutting led to cost cutting, which led to even
drabber stores and poorer service, which in turn drove customers away,
further driving down margins, resulting in even dirtier stores and worse
service. "After a while the crud kept mounting," said one former A&P
manager. "We not only haddirt, we haddirty dirt."10
Meanwhile, overat Kroger, a completely different pattern arose. Kroger
also conducted experiments in the 1960s to test the superstore concept.11
By 1970, the Kroger executive team came to an inescapable conclusion:
The old-model grocery store (which accounted for nearly 100 percent of
Kroger's business) was going to become extinct. Unlike A&P, however,
Kroger confronted this brutal truth and actedon it.
The rise of Kroger is remarkably simple and straightforward, almost
maddeningly so. During theirinterviews, Lyle Everingham andhisprede
cessor Jim Herring(CEOs duringthe pivotal transition years) were polite
and helpful, but a bit exasperated by our questions. To them, it just
seemed so clear. When we asked Everingham to allocate one hundred
points across the top five factors in the transition, he said: "I find your
question a bit perplexing. Basically, we did extensive research, and the
data came back loud and clear: The supercombination stores were the
Good to Great 69
way ofthe future.Wealso learned that youhad to be number one or num
ber two in each market, or you had to exit.* Sure, there was some skepti
cism at first. But once we looked at the facts, there was really no question
about what we had to do. So we just did it."12
Kroger decided to eliminate, change, or replace every single store and
depart every region that did not fit the new realities. The whole system
would be turned inside out, store by store, block by block, city by city,
state bystate. By the early 1990s, Kroger had rebuilt its entire system on
thenew model andwas well ontheway tobecoming the number onegro
cery chain in America, a position it would attain in 1999.13 Meanwhile,
A&P still had over half its stores in the old 1950s size and had dwindled to
a sad remnant of a once-great American institution.14
FACTS ARE BETTER THAN DREAMS
One of the dominant themes from our research is that breakthrough
results come about by a series ofgood decisions, diligently executed and
accumulated one on top ofanother. Ofcourse, the good-to-great compa
nies did not have a perfect track record. But on the whole, they made
many more good decisions than bad ones, and they made many more
good decisions than the comparison companies. Even more important, on
the really big choices, such as Kroger's decision to throw all its resources
into the task ofconverting its entire system to the superstore concept, they
wereremarkably on target.
This, of course, begs a question. Are we merely studying a set of com
panies that just happened by luck to stumble into the right set of deci
sions? Or was there something distinctive about their process that
dramatically increased the likelihood ofbeing right? The answer, it turns
out, is that there was something quite distinctive abouttheir process.
The good-to-great companies displayed two distinctive forms of disci
plined thought. The first, andthe topic ofthis chapter, is thatthey infused
the entire process with the brutal facts of reality. (The second, which we
*Keepin mind, this was the early 1970s, a full decade beforethe "number one, num
ber two, or exit" idea became mainstream. Kroger, like all good-to-great companies,
developed its ideas by paying attention tothedata right in front ofit,notby following
trends andfads setby others. Interestingly, over halfthegood-to-great companies had
some version of the "number one, number two" concept in place years before it
becamea managementfad.
70 Jim Collins
will discuss in the next chapter, isthatthey developed a simple, yetdeeply
insightful, frame of reference for all decisions.) When, as in the Kroger
case, you start with an honest anddiligent effort to determine the truth of
the situation, the right decisions often become self-evident. Notalways, of
course, but often. And even if all decisions do not become self-evident,
onething is certain: You absolutely cannot make a series ofgood decisions
without first confronting the brutal facts. The good-to-great companies
operated in accordance with this principle, and the comparison compa
nies generally did not.
Consider Pitney Bowes versus Addressograph. It would be hard to find
two companies in more similar positions at a specific moment in history
thatthen diverged sodramatically. Until 1973, they hadsimilar revenues,
profits, numbers of employees, and stock charts. Both companies held
near-monopoly market positions with virtually the same customer base
Pitney Bowes in postage meters and Addressograph in address-duplicating
machinesand both faced the imminent reality of losing their monopo
lies.15 By 2000, however, Pitney Bowes had grown to over 30,000 employ
ees and revenues in excess of $4 billion, comparedto the sorry remnants
ofAddressograph, which had less than $100 million and only 670 employ
ees.16 For the shareholder, Pitney Bowes outperformed Addressograph
3,581 to 1(yes, three thousand five hundred and eighty-one times better).
In 1976, a charismatic visionary leader named Roy Ash becameCEO
ofAddressograph. Aself-described "conglomerates," Ash had previously
built Litton by stacking acquisitions together that had since faltered.
According to Fortune, he sought to use Addressograph as a platform to
reestablish his leadership prowess in the eyes ofthe world.17
Ash set forth a vision to dominate the likes of IBM, Xerox, and Kodak in
the emerging field ofoffice automationa bold plan for a company that
had previously only dominated the envelope-address-duplication busi
ness.18 There is nothing wrong with a bold vision, butAsh became so wed
ded to his quixotic quest that, according to Business Week, he refused to
confront the mounting evidence that his plan was doomed to fail and
might take down the rest ofthe company with it.19 He insisted onmilking
cash from profitable arenas, eroding the core business while throwing
money after a gambit that had little chance ofsuccess.20
Later, after Ash was thrown out of office and the company had filed for
bankruptcy (from which it did later emerge), he still refused to confront
reality, saying: "We lost some battles, butwe were winning the war."21 But
$5,000
$4,000
$3,000
$2,000
$1,000
1963
Good to Great 71
Pitney Bowes versus Addressograph
Annual Revenues, 1963-1998
Constant 1998 Dollars, in Millions
1970 1980 1990
Pitney Bowes
Addressograph
1998
Addressograph was not even close to winning the war, and people through
out the company knew it at the time. Yet the truth went unheard until it
was too late.22 In fact, many ofAddressograph's key people bailed out of
the company, dispirited by their inability to get top management to deal
with the facts.23
Perhaps we should give Mr. Ash some credit for being a visionary who
tried to push his company to greater heights. (And, to be fair, the Address
ograph board fired Ash before he had a chance to fully carry out his
plans.)24 But theevidence from a slew ofrespectable articles written at the
time suggests that Ash turned a blind eye to any reality inconsistent with
his own vision of the world.
-f^^W^^^^f^ withcpursuingva visibn;for greatness. After alt
s,r;i&^ to-,createigreataess. But,
.V;*i#^ft^.^^^sia^gqwpapies,,th$ gQ6d-fe^great,pampariie$ con-
^ti^ ofrr&ility. ,;
72 Jim Collins
"When you turn over rocks and look at all the squiggly things under
neath,youcan either put the rock down, oryoucan say, 'My job isto turn
over rocks and lookat the squiggly things/ even if whatyou see can scare
the hell out ofyou."25 That quote, from Pitney Bowes executive Fred Pur
due, could have come from any of the Pitney Bowes executives we inter
viewed. Theyall seemed a bit, well, to be blunt, neurotic and compulsive
aboutPitney's position in the world. "This isa culture that isvery hostile
to complacency," said oneexecutive.26 "We have an itch thatwhat we just
accomplished, no matter how great, is never going to be good enough to
sustain us," said another.27
Pitney's first management meeting of the new year typically consisted
of about fifteen minutes discussing the previous year (almost always
superb results) andtwo hours talking about the"scary squiggly things" that
might impede future results.28 Pitney Bowes sales meetings were quite dif
ferent from the "aren'twe great" rah-rah sales conferences typical at most
companies: The entire management team would lay itself opento searing
questions and challenges from salespeople who dealt directly with cus
tomers.29 The company created a long-standing tradition offorums where
people could stand up and tell senior executives what the company was
doing wrong, shoving rocks with squiggly things in their faces, andsaying,
"Look! You'd better pay attention to this."30
The Addressograph case, especially in contrast to Pitney Bowes, illus
trates a vital point. Strong, charismatic leaders like Roy Ash can all too
easily become the de facto reality driving a company. Throughout the
study, we found comparison companies where the top leader led with
such force or instilled such fear that people worried more about the
leaderwhat he would say, what he would think, what he would do
than they worried aboutexternal reality and what it coulddo to the com
pany. Recall the climate at Bank ofAmerica, described in the previous
chapter, wherein managers would not even make a comment until they
knew how the CEO felt. We did not find this pattern at companies like
Wells Fargo and Pitney Bowes, where people were much more worried
about the scary squiggly things than about the feelings of top manage
ment.
The momenta leaderallows himselfto becomethe primary reality peo
ple worry about, rather than reality being the primary reality, you have a
recipe for mediocrity, or worse. This is one of the key reasons why less
charismatic leaders often produce betterlong-term results than their more
charismatic counterparts.
Good to Great 73
;v {nde?$ iw ithqse pf you wfth a strong, charismatic personality, it is
/; wortHwlSlie be as much a liabilo
ifyasmasset, Your strength of personality can sow the seeds of
;^proWe^s, when?pepple filter the brutal facts from you. You can overvjeorrieih
 febi)iti$s qf having charisma, but it does require conscious
-attention,. , ;.
Winston Churchill understood the liabilities of his strong personality,
and he compensatedfor them beautifully during the Second World War.
Churchill, as you know, maintained a bold and unwavering vision that
Britain would not just survive, but prevail as a great nationdespite the
wholeworld wondering not if but when Britain would sue for peace. Dur
ing the darkest days, with nearly all of Europe and North Africa under
Nazi control, the United States hoping to stay out of the conflict, and
Hitler fighting a one-front war (he had not yet turned on Russia),
Churchill said: "We are resolved to destroy Hitler and every vestige of the
Nazi regime. From this, nothing will turn us. Nothing! Wewill never par
ley. Wewill never negotiate with Hitler or any of his gang. We shall fight
him by land. We shall fight him by sea. We shall fight him in the air.
Until, with God's help, wehave rid the earth of his shadow."31
Armed with this bold vision, Churchill never failed, however, to con
front the most brutal facts. He feared that his towering, charismatic
personality might deter bad news from reaching him in its starkest form.
So, early in the war, he created an entirely separate department outside
the normal chain of command, calledthe Statistical Office, with the prin
cipal function of feeding himcontinuously updated and completely
unfilteredthe mostbrutal facts of reality.32 He relied heavily on this spe
cial unit throughout the war, repeatedly asking for facts, just the facts. As
the Nazi panzers swept across Europe, Churchill went to bed and slept
soundly: "I. . . had no need for cheering dreams," he wrote. "Facts are
better than dreams."33
A CLIMATE WHERE THE TRUTH IS HEARD
Now, you might be wondering, "How do you motivate people with brutal
facts? Doesn't motivation flow chiefly from a compelling vision?" The
74 Jim Collins
answer, surprisingly, is, "No." Not because vision is unimportant, but
because expending energy trying to motivate people is largely a waste of
time. One of the dominant themesthat runs throughout this book is that
ifyousuccessfully implement itsfindings, youwill not need to spend time
and energy "motivating" people. If you have the right people on the bus,
they will be self-motivated. The real question then becomes: How doyou
manage in such a way as not tode-motivate people? And one of the single
mostde-motivating actions youcan take isto hold out false hopes, soonto
be sweptaway by events.
How do you create a climate where the truth is heard? We offer four
basic practices:
J. Lead with questions, notanswers.
In 1973,one year after he assumedCEO responsibility from his father,
Alan Wurtzel's company stood at the brink of bankruptcy, dangerously
close to violation of its loan agreements. At the time, the company
(then named Wards, not to be confused with MontgomeryWard) was a
hodgepodge of appliance and hi-fi stores with no unifying concept.
Over the next ten years, Wurtzeland his team not only turned the com
pany around, but also created the Circuit City concept and laid the
foundations for a stunning record of results, beating the markettwentytwo
times from its transition date in 1982to January 1, 2000.
When Alan Wurtzel started the long traverse from near bankruptcy
to these stellar results, he began with a remarkable answerto the ques
tion ofwhere to take the company: I don't know. Unlike leaders such as
Roy Ash of Addressograph, Wurtzel resisted the urge to walk in with
"the answer." Instead, once he put the right people on the bus, he
began not with answers, but with questions. "Alan was a real spark,"
said a board member. "He had an abilityto askquestions that were just
Good to Great 75
marvelous. We had some wonderful debates in the boardroom. It was
never just a dog and pony show, where you would just listen and then
go to lunch."34 Indeed, Wurtzel stands as one of the few CEOs in a
large corporation who put more questions to his board members than
they put to him.
He used the same approach with his executive team, constantly
pushingand probing and prodding with questions. Each stepalongthe
way, Wurtzel wouldkeep asking questions until he had a clear picture
of reality and its implications. "They used to call me the prosecutor,
becauseI wouldhome in on a question," saidWurtzel. "You know, like
a bulldog, I wouldn't let go until I understood. Why,why, why?"
Like Wurtzel, leaders in each of the good-to-great transitions oper
ated with a somewhat Socratic style. Furthermore, they used questions
for one and only one reason: to gain understanding. They didn't use
questions as a form of manipulation ("Don't you agree with me on
that? . . .") or asa way to blameor put down others ("Why did you mess
this up? ..."). Whenwe asked the executives abouttheir management
team meetings during the transition era, theysaidthat they spent much
of the time "just trying to understand."
The good-to-great leaders made particularly good use of informal
meetings where they'd meet with groups of managers and employees
with no script, agenda, or set of action items to discuss. Instead, they
would start with questions like: "So, what's on your mind?" "Can you
tell me about that?" "Can you help me understand?" "What should we
be worried about?" Thesenon-agenda meetings became a forum where
current realities tended to bubble to the surface.
^;;Mi^ilf^ ffoW;'|godr:t|^|feat *<$j^'j^ wrth/the
,-1;^||^^^ ey#f^^ wfea
^ti^^ r^^^^^^m^;^ tftfrelies-
2. Engage in dialogue anddebate, notcoercion.
In 1965, you could hardly find a company more awfiil than Nucor. It
had only one division that made money. Everything else drained cash.
It had no culture to be proud of. It had no consistent direction. It was
76 Jim Collins
on the verge of bankruptcy. Atthe time, Nucor was officially knownas
the Nuclear Corporation of America, reflecting its orientation to
nuclear energy products, including the Scintillation Probe (yes, they
really named it that), usedforradiation measurement. It had acquired a
seriesof unrelated businesses in such arenas as semiconductor supplies,
rare earth materials, electrostatic office copiers, and roof joists. At the
start of its transformation in 1965, Nucor did not manufacture one
ounce of steel. Nor did it make a penny of profit. Thirty years later,
Nucor stood as the fourth-largest steelmaker in the world35 andby 1999
made greater annual profits than any other American steel company.36
How did Nucor transition from the utterly awful Nuclear Corpora
tion ofAmerica into perhaps the best steel company in America? First,
Nucor benefitedfrom the emergence of a Level 5 leader, Ken Iverson,
promoted to CEO from general manager of the joist division. Second,
Iverson got the right people on the bus, buildinga remarkable team of
people like Sam Siegel (described by one of his colleagues as "the best
money manager in the world, a magician") and David Aycock, an oper
ations genius.37
And then what?
Like Alan Wurtzel, Iverson dreamed of building a great company,
but refused to begin with"the answer" forhowto get there. Instead, he
played the role of Socratic moderator in a series of raging debates. "We
established an ongoing series ofgeneral manager meetings, and myrole
was more as a mediator," commented Iverson. "They were chaos. We
would stay there for hours, ironing out the issues, until we came to
something.... Attimes, the meetings would get so violent that people
almost went across the table at each other.... People yelled. They
waved their arms around and pounded on tables. Faces would get red
and veins bulged out."38
Iverson's assistant tells of a scene repeated over the years, wherein
colleagues would march into Iverson's office and yell and scream at
each other, but then emerge with a conclusion.39 Argue and debate,
then sell the nuclear business; argue and debate, then focus on steel
joists; argue and debate, then begin to manufacture their own steel;
argue and debate, then invest in their own mini-mill; argue and
debate, then build a second mini-mill, and so forth. Nearly all the
Nucor executives we spoke with described a climate of debate,
wherein the company's strategy "evolved through many agonizing
arguments and fights."40
Good to Great n
?$$& Hm$zp all14fe|^obd^gce^4 scQppnl^^Wstd a penchant for
j^^feN^-f^jM', p^^er^*,tl;"^ci^ :%rttf inteww transcripts from"
;; ^ tolet
3. Conduct autopsies, without blame.
In 1978, Philip Morris acquired the Seven-Up Company, only to sell
it eight years later at a loss.41 The financial loss was relatively small
compared to Philip Morris's total assets, but it was a highly visible
black eye thatconsumed thousands ofhours ofprecious management
time.
In our interviews with the Philip Morris executives, we were struck
by howthey all brought up the debacle on their own and discussed it
openly. Instead ofhiding their big, ugly mistake, they seemed to feel an
almost therapeutic need to talk about it. In his book, Ym a Lucky Guy,
Joe Cullman dedicates five pages to dissecting the 7UP disaster. He
doesn't hold back the embarrassing truth about how flawed the deci
sion was. It is a five-page clinical analysis of the mistake, its implica
tions, and its lessons.
Hundreds, ifnotthousands, ofpeople hours had been spent in autop
sies ofthe7UP case. Yet, as much as they talked about this conspicuous
failure, no one pointed fingers to single out blame. There is only one
exception to this pattern: Joe Cullman, standing in front of the mirror,
pointing the finger right at himself. "[It] ... became apparent that this
was another Joe Cullman plan that didn't work," he writes.42 He goes
even further, implying that if he'd only listened better to the people
who challenged his idea at the time, the disaster might have been
averted. He goes outofhis way to give credit tothose who were right in
retrospect, naming those specific individuals who were more prescient
than himself.
In an era when leaders go to great lengths to preserve the image of
their own track recordstepping forth to claim credit about how they
were visionary when their colleagues were not, but finding others to
blame when their decisions go awryit is quite refreshing to come
78 Jim Collins
across Cullman. He set the tone: "J will take responsibility for this bad
decision. Butwewill all take responsibility for extracting the maximum
learningfrom the tuition we've paid."
4. Build "red flag" mechanisms.
Welive in an information age, when those with more and better infor
mation supposedly have an advantage. If you look across the rise and
fall oforganizations, however, you will rarely find companies stumbling
because they lacked information.
Bethlehem Steel executives had known for years about the threat
of mini-mill companies like Nucor. They paid little attention until
they woke up one day to discover large chunks of market share taken
away.43
Upjohn had plenty of information that indicated some of its forth
coming products would fail to deliver anticipated results or, worse, had
potentially serious side effects. Yet it often ignored those problems. With
Halcion, for example, an insider was quoted in Newsweek saying, "dis
missing safety concerns about Halcion had become virtual company
policy." In another case when Upjohn found itself under fire, it framed
its problems as "adverse publicity," rather than confronting the truth of
its own shortcomings.44
Executives at Bank of America had plenty of information about the
realities ofderegulation, yet they failed to confront the onebigimplica
tion ofthose realities: In a deregulated world, banking would be a com
modity, and the old perks and genteel traditions of banking would be
gone forever. Not until ithad lost $1.8 billion did Bank ofAmerica fully
accept this fact. In contrast, Carl Reichardt ofWells Fargo, called the
ultimate realist by his predecessor, hit the brutal facts of deregulation
head-on.45 Sorry, fellow bankers, but we can preserve the banker class
no more. We've gotto be businessmen with asmuch attention to costs
and effectiveness as McDonald's.
Good to Great 79
;;* itea|ed|^kfoand/nt> g^^ee^haf^^ttegood-to-grea:t companies had
V/^attprt'rfte iriformation,rhut in turning
:: rnfotrfeifonlnta infers
One particularly powerful way to accomplish this is through red flag
mechanisms. Allow me to use a personal example to illustrate the idea.
When teaching by the case method at Stanford Business School, I
issued to each MBA student an 8.5" x 11" bright red sheet of paper,
with the following instructions: "This is your red flag for the quarter. If
you raise your hand with your red flag, the classroom will stop for you.
There are no restrictions on when and how to use your red flag; the
decision rests entirely in yourhands. You can use it to voice an observa
tion, share a personal experience, present an analysis, disagree with the
professor, challenge a CEO guest, respond to a fellow student, ask a
question, make a suggestion, or whatever. There will be no penalty
whatsoever for any use ofa red flag. Your red flag canbe used only once
during the quarter. Your red flag is nontransferable; you cannot give or
sell it to another student."
With the red flag, I had noidea precisely what would happen each day
in class. In one situation, a student used her red flag to state, "Professor
Collins, I think you are doing a particularly ineffective job of running
class today. You are leading too much with your questions and stifling our
independent thinking. Let us think for ourselves." The red flag con
fronted mewith thebrutal fact thatmy own questioning style stood in the
way ofpeople's learning. Astudent survey attheendofthe quarter would
have given me that same information. But the red flagreal time, in
front of everyone in the classroomturned information about the short
comings ofthe class into information thatI absolutely could notignore.
I got the idea for red flag mechanisms from Bruce Woolpert, who
instituted a particularly powerful device called short pay at his company
Graniterock. Short pay gives the customer full discretionary power to
decide whether and how much to pay on an invoice based upon his
own subjective evaluation ofhow satisfied he feels with a product orser
vice. Short pay is not a refund policy. The customer does not need to
80 Jim Collins
return the product, nor does he need to call Graniterock for permis
sion. He simply circles the offending item on the invoice, deducts it
from the total, and sends a check for the balance. When I asked
Woolpert his reasons for short pay, he said, "You can geta lot of infor
mation from customer surveys, but there are always ways of explaining
away the data. With shortpay, you absolutely have to payattention to
the data. You often don't know that a customer is upset until you lose
that customer entirely. Short pay acts as an early warning system that
forces us to adjust quickly, longbefore we would lose that customer."
To be clear, we did not generally find red flag mechanisms as vivid
and dramatic asshort pay in the good-to-great companies. Nonetheless,
I'vedecidedto includethisideahere, at the urging ofresearch assistant
Lane Hornung. Hornung, who helped mesystematically research and
collate mechanisms across companies for a different research project,
makes the compelling argument that ifyou're a fully developed Level 5
leader, you mightnot need redflag mechanisms. But ifyou are not yet
a Level 5leader, or ifyou suffer the liability ofcharisma, redflag mech
anisms give you a practical anduseful tool for turning information into
information that cannot be ignored and for creating a climate where
the truth is heard.*
UNWAVERING FAITH AMID THE BRUTAL FACTS
When Procter&Gamble invaded the paper-based consumer business in
the late 1960s, Scott Paper (thenthe leader) simply resigned itself to sec
ond place without a fight and began looking for ways to diversify.46 "The
company had a meeting for analysts in 1971 that was one of the most
depressing I've ever attended," said oneanalyst. "Management essentially
threw in the towel and said, We've been had.' "47 The once-proud com
pany began to look at its competition and say, "Here's how we stack up
against the best," and sigh, "Oh, well... at least there are people in the
business worse than weare."48 Instead offiguring out howto get backon
the offensive and win, Scott justtried to protectwhat it had. Conceding
the top end of the market to P&G, Scott hoped that, by hiding away in
*For a more complete discussion ofmechanisms, see the article "Turning Goals into
Results: The Power ofCatalytic Mechanisms," Harvard Business Review, July-August,
1999.
Good to Great 81
the Bcategory, it would be leftalone bythe bigmonster that had invaded
its turf.49
Kimberly-Clark, on the other hand, viewed competing against Procter
& Gamble not as a liability, but as an asset. Darwin Smith and his team
felt exhilarated by the idea of going up against the best, seeing it as an
opportunity to make Kimberly-Clark better and stronger. They also
viewed it as a way to stimulate the competitive juices of Kimberly people
at all levels. At one internal gathering, Darwin Smith stood up and started
his talk bysaying, "Okay, I want everyone to rise in a momentofsilence."
Everyone looked around, wondering what Darwin was up to. Did some
onedie? And so, after a moment ofconfusion, they allstood up andstared
at their shoes in reverent silence. After an appropriate pause, Smith
looked out at the groupand said in a somber tone, "That was a moment of
silence for P&G."
The place went bananas. Blair White, a director who witnessed the
incident, said, "Hehadeveryone wound up in this thing, allup anddown
thecompany, right down totheplant floor. We were taking onGoliath!"50
Later, Wayne Sanders (Smith's successor) described to us the incredible
benefit ofcompeting against the best: "Could we have a better adversary
than P&G? Not a chance. I say that because we respect them so much.
They are bigger than we are. They are very talented. They are great at
marketing. They beat thehell outofevery one oftheir competitors, except
one, Kimberly-Clark. That is oneofthe things thatmakes usso proud."51
^P9tt;Paper's; arid Kimberiy-CIark's differing reactions;to P&<ibring u?
;to a vital pdintJrWconfronting the brutal facfe, the gobd-to-great compa
nies lafthe^ strongeranymore resilfent, notweaker and more
^j^pirlfed;Th&e is>a;sens^# exhilaration .thafceomesiri facihg/bead*n\
the hard Whs;andsayiftg, "We will never gjye up. We will rieyer capita
4ate.lt might take a long tirxie, but we: w/Wfir^d ,^way, to prevail? *
Robert Aders of Kroger summed this up nicely at the end of his inter
view, describing the psychology ofthe Kroger team as itfaced the daunting
twenty-year task of methodically turning over the entire Kroger system.
"There was a certain Churchillian character to what we were doing. We
hada very strong will tolive, thesense that we are Kroger, Kroger was here
before and will be here long after we are gone, and, by god, we are going
82 Jim Collins
to win this thing. Itmight take us a hundred years, but we will persist for a
hundred years, if that's what it takes."52
Throughout our research, we were continually reminded ofthe "hardi
ness" research studies done bythe International Committee for the Study
ofVictimization. These studies looked at peoplewhohad suffered serious
adversitycancer patients, prisoners of war, accident victims, and so
forthand survived. Theyfound that people fell generally into three cat
egories: those who were permanently dispirited by the event, those who
got their life back to normal, and those who used the experience as a
defining event that made them stronger.53 The good-to-great companies
were like those in the third group, with the "hardiness factor."
When Fannie Mae began its transition in the early 1980s, almost no
one gave it high odds for success, much less for greatness. Fannie Mae
had $56 billion of loans that were losing money. It received about 9 per
cent interest on its mortgage portfolio but had to pay up to 15 percenton
the debt it issued. Multiply that difference times $56billion, and youget
a very large negative number! Furthermore, by charter, Fannie Mae could
not diversify outside the mortgage finance business. Most people viewed
Fannie Mae as totally beholden to shifts in the direction of interest
ratesthey go up and Fannie Mae loses, they go down and FannieMae
winsand many believed that Fannie Maecould succeed only ifthe gov
ernment stepped in to clamp down on interest rates.54 "That's their only
hope," said oneanalyst.55
But that's not the way David Maxwell and his newly assembled team
viewed the situation. They never wavered in their faith, consistently
emphasizing in their interviews with us that they never had the goal to
merely survive but to prevail in the endasa great company. Yes, the inter
estspread was a brutal fact thatwas notgoing to magically disappear. Fan
nie Mae had no choice but to become the best capital markets player in
the world at managing mortgage interest risk. Maxwell and his team set
out to create a new business model that woulddepend much less on inter
est rates, involving the invention of very sophisticated mortgage finance
instruments. Most analysts responded with derision. "When you've got
$56billionworth ofloansin placeand underwater, talking about newpro
grams is a joke," said one. "That's like Chrysler [then asking for federal
loan guarantees to stave off bankruptcy] going into the aircraft business."56
After completing my interview with David Maxwell, I asked how he
and histeam dealtwiththe naysayers duringthosedarkdays. "It was never
an issue internally," he said. "Of course, wehad to stop doinga lot of stuGood
to Great 83
pid things,and wehad to inventa completely newset of financial devices.
Butwenever entertained the possibility that wewouldfail. We weregoing
to use the calamity as an opportunity to remake Fannie Mae into a great
company."57
During a research meeting, a team member commented that Fannie
Mae reminded her of an old television show, The Six Million Dollar Man
withLee Majors. The pretextof the series is that an astronautsuffers a seri
ous crash while testing a moon landing craft over a southwestern desert.
Instead of just trying to save the patient, doctors completely redesign him
into a superhuman cyborg, installing atomic-powered robotic devices such
as a powerful left eye and mechanical limbs.58 Similarly, David Maxwell
and his team didn't use the fact that Fannie Mae was bleeding and near
death as a pretext to merely restructure the company. They used it as an
opportunity to create something much stronger and more powerful. Step
by step, day by day, month by month, the Fannie Mae team rebuilt the
entire business model around risk managementand reshaped the corpo
rate culture into a high-performance machine that rivaled anything on
Wall Street, eventually generating stock returns nearly eight times the
market over fifteen years.
THE STOCKDALE PARADOX
Of course, not all good-to-great companiesfaced a dire crisis like Fannie
Mae; fewer than half did. But every good-to-great company faced signifi
cant adversity along the way to greatness, of one sort or anotherGillette
and the takeover battles, Nucor and imports, Wells Fargo and deregula
tion, Pitney Bowes losing its monopoly, Abbott Labs and a huge product
recall, Kroger and the need to replace nearly 100percent of its stores, and
so forth. In every case, the managementteam responded with a powerful
psychological duality. On the one hand, theystoically accepted the brutal
facts of reality. On the other hand, they maintained an unwavering faith
in the endgame,and a commitmentto prevail as a greatcompanydespite
the brutal facts. We came to call this dualitythe Stockdale Paradox.
The name refers to Admiral Jim Stockdale, who was the highestranking
United States military officer in the "Hanoi Hilton" prisoner-ofwar
camp during the height of the Vietnam War. Tortured over twenty
times during his eight-year imprisonment from 1965 to 1973, Stockdale
livedout the warwithout any prisoner's rights, no set release date, and no
84 Jim Collins
certainty as to whether he would evensurvive to see his family again. He
shouldered the burden of command,doing everything he could to create
conditions that would increase the number of prisoners who would sur
vive unbroken, whilefighting an internalwaragainst his captors and their
attempts to usethe prisoners forpropaganda. Atone point,he beat himself
with a stool and cut himselfwith a razor, deliberately disfiguring himself,
so that he could not be put on videotape as an example of a "well-treated
prisoner." He exchanged secret intelligence information with his wife
through their letters, knowing that discovery would mean more torture
and perhaps death. He instituted rules that would help people to deal
with torture (no one can resist torture indefinitely, so he created a step
wise systemafter x minutes, you can say certain thingsthat gave the
men milestones to survive toward). He instituted an elaborate internal
communications system to reduce the sense of isolation that their captors
tried to create, which used a five-by-five matrix of tap codes for alpha
characters. (Tap-tap equals the letter a, tap-pause-tap-tap equals the letter
b, tap-tap-pause-tap equals the letter f, and so forth, for twenty-five letters,
c doubling in for k.) Atone point, during an imposed silence, the prison
ersmopped and swept the central yard using the code,swish-swashing out
"We love you" to Stockdale, on the third anniversary of his being shot
down. After his release, Stockdale became the first three-star officer in the
history of the navy to wear both aviator wings and the Congressional
Medal of Honor.59
You can understand, then, myanticipation at the prospect of spending
part of an afternoon with Stockdale. One of my students had written his
paperon Stockdale, whohappened to be a seniorresearch fellow studying
the Stoic philosophers at the Hoover Institution rightacross the streetfrom
my office, and Stockdale invited the twoof us for lunch. In preparation, I
read In Loveand War, the book Stockdale and his wife had written in alter
nating chapters, chroniclingtheir experiences during those eight years.
As I moved through the book, I found myselfgetting depressed. It just
seemed so bleakthe uncertainty of his fate, the brutality of his captors,
and so forth. And then, it dawnedon me: "Here I am sitting in my warm
and comfortable office, looking out over the beautiful Stanford campus
on a beautiful Saturday afternoon. I'm getting depressed readingthis, and
I knowthe end of the story! I know that he gets out, reuniteswith his fam
ily, becomes a national hero, and gets to spend the later years of his life
studying philosophy on this same beautiful campus. If it feels depressing
Good to Great 85
for me, how on earth did he deal with it when he was actually there and
didnot know theendof thestory?"
"I never lostfaith in the end of the story," he said, when I asked him. "I
never doubted not onlythat I would get out, but also that I would prevail
in the end and turn the experience into the defining event of my life,
which, in retrospect, I would not trade."
I didn't say anything for manyminutes, and we continued the slow walk
toward the faculty club, Stockdale limping and arc-swinging his stiffleg
that had never fully recovered from repeated torture. Finally, after about a
hundred meters of silence, I asked, "Who didn't make it out?"
"Oh, that's easy," he said. "The optimists."
"The optimists? I don't understand," I said, now completely confused,
given what he'd said a hundred meters earlier.
"The optimists. Oh, theywere the oneswhosaid,We're goingto be out
by Christmas.' And Christmas would come, and Christmas would go.
Then they'd say, 'We're going to be out by Easter.' And Easter would
come, and Easterwouldgo.Andthen Thanksgiving, and then it would be
Christmas again.And they died of a broken heart."
Anotherlong pause,and morewalking. Then he turned to me and said,
"This is a very important lesson. You must never confuse faith that you
will prevail in the endwhichyou can neverafford to losewith the dis
cipline to confront the most brutal facts of your current reality, whatever
they might be."
To this day, I carrya mental image of Stockdale admonishing the opti
mists: "We're not getting out by Christmas; deal with it!"
That conversation withAdmiral Stockdale stayed with me, and in fact had
a profound influence on myowndevelopment. Life is unfairsometimes
to our advantage, sometimes to our disadvantage. We will all experience
disappointments and crushing events somewhere along the way, setbacks
for which there is no "reason," no one to blame. It might be disease; it
might be injury; it might be an accident; it might be losinga lovedone; it
might be getting swept away in a political shake-up; it might be getting
shot down over Vietnam and thrown into a POW camp for eight years.
What separates people, Stockdale taught me, is not the presence or
86 Jim Collins
absence of difficulty, but howthey deal with the inevitable difficulties of
life. In wresding with life's challenges, the Stockdale Paradox (you must
retainfaith that youwill prevail in the end and youmustalso confrontthe
most brutal facts of your current reality) has proved powerful for coming
backfrom difficulties not weakened, but strongernot justforme, but for
all those who've learned the lesson and triedto apply it.
I neverreally considered mywalk with Stockdale as part ofmyresearch
into great companies, categorizing it more as a personal rather than cor
porate lesson. But as we unraveled the research evidence, I kept coming
backto it in myownmind. Finally, one dayduring a research-team meet
ing, I shared the Stockdale story. There was silence around the table when
I finished, and I thought,"Theymustthink I'm really out in left field."
Then Duane Duffy, a quiet and thoughtful team member who had
done the A&P versus Kroger analysis, said, "That's exactly what I've been
struggling with. I've been trying to get myhands around the essential dif
ference between A&P and Kroger. And that's it. Kroger was like Stockdale,
and A&P was like the optimists whoalways thought they'd be out by
Christmas."
Then other team members began to chime in, noting the same differ
ence betweentheir comparison setsWells Fargo versus BankofAmerica
both facing deregulation, Kimberly-Clark versus Scott Paper both facing
the terrible might of Procter & Gamble, Pitney Bowes versus Addresso
graph both facing the loss of their monopolies, Nucor versus Bethlehem
Steel both facing imports, and so forth. They all demonstrated this para
doxical psychological pattern,and wedubbed it the Stockdale Paradox.
The Stockdale Paradox is a signature of all those who create greatness,
be it in leading their ownlives or in leading others. Churchill had it dur
ing the Second World War. Admiral Stockdale, like Viktor Frankl before
him, lived it in a prison camp. And while our good-to-great companies
cannot claim to have experienced either the grandeur of saving the free
Good to Great 87
world or the depth ofpersonal experience ofliving in a POWcamp, they
all embraced the Stockdale Paradox. It didn't matter how bleak the situa
tion or how stultifying their mediocrity, they all maintained unwavering
faith that theywould not justsurvive, but prevail asa great company. And
yet, at the same time, they became relentlessly disciplined at confronting
the most brutal facts of their current reality.
Like much of what wefound in our research,the keyelements of great
ness are deceptively simple andstraightforward. The good-to-great leaders
were ableto strip away somuchnoise andclutter and justfocus on the few
things that would have the greatest impact. They were able to do so in
large partbecause they operated from both sides ofthe Stockdale Paradox,
never letting one side overshadow the other. If you are able to adopt this
dual pattern, you will dramatically increase the odds ofmaking a series of
good decisions and ultimately discovering a simple, yetdeeply insightful,
concept for making the really bigchoices. And onceyou have thatsimple,
unifying concept, you will bevery close tomaking a sustained transition to
breakthrough results. It isto the creation ofthat concept thatwenow turn.
CONFRONT THE BRUTAL FACTS
( Y E T N E V E R I O S E F A I T H )
KEY POINTS T
 All good-to-great companies began the process offinding a path to
greatness by confronting the brutal facts oftheir current reality; :
 When you start with an honest arid diligent effort to determine the
truth of your situation, the right decisions often become selfevident
It is impossible to make good decisions without infusing
the entire process withan honestconfrontation ofthe brutal facts.
Aprimary task in taking a company from good to great is to created
culture wherein people have a tremendous opportunity tobeheard
and, ultimately, for the truth to be heard. ;
 Creating a climate where the truth is heard involves four basic
practices:
1. Lead with questions, not answers.
2. Engage in dialogue and debate, not coercion.
3. Conduct autopsies, without blame.
4. Build red flag mechanisms that turn informaitiori into informa
tion that cannot be ignored.
 The good-to-great companies faced just as much adversity as the
comparison companies, but responded to that adversity differently.
They hit the realities of their situation head-on. As a result, they
emerged from adversity even stronger,
Akey psychology for leading from good to great is the Stockdale
Paradox: Retain absolute faith thatyou can and will prevail in the
end, regardless of the difficulties, AND at the same time confront
the most brutal facts ofyour current reality, whatever they might be.
Good to Great 89
UNEXPECTED FINDINGS
Charisma can be as much a liability as an asset, as the strength of
yourleadership personality can deter peoplefrom bringingyou the
brutal facts.
Leadership does not begin just with vision. It begins with getting
people to confront the brutal facts and to act on the implications.
Spendingtime and energy trying to "motivate" people is a waste of
effort. The real question is not, "Howdo we motivate our people?"
If you have the right people, theywill be self-motivated. The keyis
to not cfe-motivate them. One of the primary ways to de-motivate
people isto ignore the brutal facts ofreality.
JS H A EL..T E fL
Simplicity within the Three Circles)
Level 5 First Who. .. Confront the
Leadership Then What Brutal Facts
Culture of Technology
Discipline Accelerators
Know thyself.
Scribes of Delphi,
via Plato1
%re you a hedgehog or a fox?
In his famous essay "The Hedgehog and the Fox," Isaiah Berlin divided
the world into hedgehogs and foxes, based upon an ancient Greek para
ble: "The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big
thing."2 The fox isa cunningcreature, able to devise a myriad ofcomplex
strategies forsneakattacks upon the hedgehog. Dayin and dayout, the fox
circles around the hedgehog's den, waiting for the perfect moment to
pounce. Fast, sleek, beautiful, fleet of foot, and craftythe fox looks like
the sure winner. The hedgehog, on the other hand, is a dowdier creature,
looking likea genetic mix-up between a porcupineand a smallarmadillo.
He waddles along, going about his simple day, searching for lunch and
taking care of his home.
The fox waits in cunningsilence at the juncturein the trail. The hedge
hog, minding his own business, wanders right into the path of the fox.
Good to Great 91
"Aha, I've gotyou now!" thinks the fox. Heleaps out,bounding across the
ground, lightning fast. The litde hedgehog, sensing danger, looks up and
thinks, "Here we go again. Will he ever learn?" Rolling up into a perfect
little ball, the hedgehog becomes a sphere of sharp spikes, pointing out
ward in all directions. The fox, bounding toward his prey, sees the hedge
hogdefense and calls offthe attack. Retreating back to the forest, the fox
begins to calculate a new lineofattack. Each day, some version ofthis bat
tle between the hedgehog and the fox takes place, and despite the greater
cunning of the fox, the hedgehog always wins.
Berlin extrapolated from this little parable to divide people into two
basic groups: foxes and hedgehogs. Foxes pursue many ends at the same
time and seethe world in all its complexity. Theyare "scattered or diffused,
moving on many levels," says Berlin, never integrating their thinking into
one overall concept or unifying vision. Hedgehogs, on the other hand,
simplify a complex world intoa single organizing idea, a basic principle or
conceptthat unifies and guides everything. It doesn't matter howcomplex
the world, a hedgehog reduces all challenges and dilemmas to simple
indeed almost simplistichedgehog ideas. Fora hedgehog, anything that
doesnot somehow relateto the hedgehog idea holdsno relevance.
Princeton professor Marvin Bressler pointed out the power of the
hedgehog during one of our long conversations: "You wantto know what
separates those who make the biggest impact from all the others who are
just as smart? They're hedgehogs." Freud and the unconscious, Darwin
and natural selection, Marx and class struggle, Einstein and relativity,
Adam Smith and division of laborthey were all hedgehogs. They took a
complex world and simplified it. "Thosewholeave the biggest footprints,"
said Bressler, "have thousands calling after them, 'Good idea, but you
went too far!'"3
To be clear, hedgehogs are not stupid. Quite the contrary. They under
stand that the essence of profound insight is simplicity. What could be
more simple than e = mc2? What could be simpler than the idea of the
unconscious, organized into an id, ego, and superego? What could be
more elegant than Adam Smith's pin factory and "invisible hand"? No,
the hedgehogs aren't simpletons; they have a piercing insight that allows
them to see through complexity and discern underlying patterns. Hedge
hogs see what is essential, and ignore the rest.
What does all this talk of hedgehogs and foxes have to do with good to
great? Everything.
92 Jim Collins
:MMMMMMMMM
Consider the case of Walgreens versus Eckerd. Recall how Walgreens
generated cumulative stock returns from the end of 1975 to 2000 that
exceeded the market by over fifteen times, handily beating such great
companies asGE, Merck, Coca-Cola, and Intel. It was a remarkable per
formance for such an anonymoussome might even say boringcom
pany. Wheninterviewing Cork Walgreen, I kept asking him to godeeper,
to help us understand these extraordinary results. Finally, in exasperation,
he said, "Look, it just wasn't that complicated! Once we understood the
concept, we justmoved straight ahead."4
Whatwas the concept? Simply this: thebest, most convenient drugstores,
with high profit percustomer visit. That's it. That's the breakthrough strat
egy that Walgreens used to beat Intel, GE, Coca-Cola, and Merck.
In classic hedgehog style, Walgreens took this simple concept and imple
mented it with fanatical consistency. It embarked on a systematic program
to replace all inconvenient locations with more convenient ones, preferably
corner lots where customers could easily enterandexit from multiple direc
tions. Ifa great corner location would openup justhalfa block away from a
profitable Walgreens store in a good location, the company would close the
good store (even ata cost of$1 million toget outofthelease) toopen a great
new store on the corner.5 Walgreens pioneered drive-through pharmacies,
found customersliked the idea, and built hundreds of them. In urban areas,
the company clustered its stores tightly together, on the preceptthat no one
should have to walk more thana few blocks to reach a Walgreens.6 In down
town San Francisco, for example, Walgreens clustered nine stores withina
one-mile radius. Nine stores!7 If you look closely, you will see Walgreens
stores asdensely packed in some cities as Starbucks coffee shops in Seattle.
Walgreens then linked its convenience conceptto a simple economic
idea, profit per customer visit. Tight clustering (nine stores per mile!)
leads to local economies of scale, which provides the cash for more clus
tering, which in turn draws more customers. By adding high-margin ser$
750
$500
Good to Great 93
Walgreens Versus Selected Great Companies
Cumulative Stock Returns of $1 Invested,
December 31, 1975 - January 1, 2000
Walgreens: $562
IV Intel: $309
$250 A/ J I
vices, like one-hour photo developing, Walgreens increased its profit per
customer visit. More convenience led to more customer visits, which,
when multiplied times increased profit per customer visit, threw cash
back into the system to build even more convenient stores. Store by store,
block byblock, city bycity, region byregion, Walgreens becamemoreand
more of a hedgehog withthis incredibly simple idea.
In a world overrun by managementfaddists, brilliant visionaries, rant
ing futurists, fearmongers, motivational gurus, and all the rest, it's refresh
ing to see a companysucceed so brilliantly bytaking one simple concept
and just doing it with excellence and imagination. Becoming the best in
the worldat convenient drugstores, steadily increasingprofitper customer
visitwhat could be more obvious and straightforward?
Yet, if it was so obvious and straightforward, whydidn't Eckerd see it?
While Walgreens stuck only to cities where it could implement the con
venience/clustering concept, we found no evidence of a similarly coher
ent concept for growth at Eckerd. Deal makers to the core, Eckerd's
executives compulsively leapt at opportunities to acquire clumps of
storesforty-two units here, thirty-six units therein hodgepodge fash
ion, with no obvious unifying theme.
94 Jim Collins
While Walgreens executives understood that profitable growth would
come by pruning away all that did not fit with the Hedgehog Concept,
Eckerd executives lurched after growth for growth's sake. In the early
1980s, just as Walgreens became religious about carrying out its conve
nient drugstore concept, Eckerd threw itselfinto the home video market
with its purchase ofAmerican Home Video Corporation. Eckerd's CEO
toldForbes magazine in 1981, "Some feel the purerweare the betterwe'll
be. But I want growth, and the home video industry is only emerging
unlike, say, drugstore chains."8 Eckerd's home video foray produced $31
million in losses before Eckerd sold it toTandy, which crowed that it got
the deal for $72 million below book value.9
In the precise year of Eckerd's American Home Video acquisition,
Walgreens and Eckerdhad virtually identical revenues ($1.7 billion). Ten
years later, Walgreens had grown to over twice the revenues of Eckerd,
accumulating net profits $1 billion greater than Eckerd over the decade.
Twenty years later, Walgreens was going strong, as one of the most
sustained transformations in our study. Meanwhile, Eckerd ceased to exist
asan independent company.10
THE THREE CIRCLES
The notion of a Hedgehog Concept originated in our research team
meetings when we were trying to make sense of Walgreens' spectacular
returns.
"Aren't wejusttalking aboutstrategy?" I asked. "Convenient drugstores,
profit per customer visitisn't that justbasic strategy? What's so interest
ing about that?"
"But Eckerd also had strategy," said Jenni Cooper, who analyzed the
contrastbetweenthe two companies. "Wecan't say that it's justabout hav
ing strategy. They both had strategy." Jenni was correct in her observation.
Strategy per se did not distinguish the good-to-great companies from the
comparison companies. Both sets of companies had strategic plans, and
there is absolutely no evidence that the good-to-great companies invested
moretime and energy in strategy development and long-range planning.
"Okay, soare we justtalking aboutgood strategy versus bad strategy?"
The team sat there for a minute, thinking. Then Leigh Wilbanks
observed, "ButwhatI find sostriking istheir incredible simplicity. I mean,
look at Kroger with the superstore concept, or Kimberly-Clark with the
Good to Great 95
move to paper-based consumer products, or Walgreens with convenient
drugstores. Thesewere simple, simple, simple ideas."
The research-team members all jumped into the fray, bantering about
the companies they were studying. It soon became abundantly clear that
all the good-to-great companies attained a very simple concept that they
used as a frame of referencefor all their decisions, and this understanding
coincided withbreakthrough results. Meanwhile, the comparison compa
nies like Eckerd got all tripped up by their snazzy strategies for growth.
"Okay," I pushed back, "but issimplicity enough? Just because it'ssimple
doesn't mean it's right. The world is filled with failed companies that had
simple but wrong ideas."
Then we decided to undertake a systematic look at the concepts that
guided the good-to-great companies in contrast to the comparison compa
nies. After a few months of sifting and sorting, considering possibilities
and tossing them out, we finally cameto seethat the Hedgehog Concept
in each good-to-great company wasn't just anyrandom simple idea.
%ie ;ess;entiar strategic difference betwete^
.q^mpari^Qn cd$0aWes lay in two fundamentll; dilttoc^lojl^ First,, the
gpod-tp-gfeat companies founded their stfafegles: on d'e&p under
standing along three key dimensrons^wha! we came, to call the thr^e
cirdles. Second, the good-to-great companiesIfanslaifed thatfiinctef-
.standing,: into a simple, ciystalljne, concept i^'a^'..gMid^/^/^liiBi.r.-"
,feffortS-ihence the term Hedgehog 6onc&fii, r-v*"" :^ t- ^
More precisely, a Hedgehog Concept is a simple, crystalline concept
that flows from deep understanding about the intersection of the following
three circles:
1.What you can be the best in the world at (and, equally important, what
you cannot be the best in the world at). This discerning standard goes
far beyond core competence. Just because you possess a core compe
tence doesn't necessarily mean you can be the best in the world at it.
Conversely, whatyou can be the best at might not even be something
in which you are currently engaged.
2. What drives your economic engine. All the good-to-great companies
attainedpiercinginsight intohowto mosteffectively generatesustained
96 Jim Collins
and robust cash flow and profitability. Inparticular, they discovered the
single denominatorprofit per xthat had thegreatest impact ontheir
economics. (It would be cash flow per x in the social sector.)
3. What you are deeply passionate about. The good-to-great companies
focused on those activities that ignited their passion. The idea here is
notto stimulate passion butto discover what makes you passionate.
What you are deeply
passionate about
What you can F^^*^^J What drives
BE THE BEST IN \ / YOUR
THE WORLD AT \ / ECONOMIC
/ ENGINE
Three Circles of the Hedgehog Concept
Toquickly grasp the three circles, consider thefollowing personal anal
ogy. Suppose you were able toconstruct awork life thatmeets thefollowing
three tests. First, you are doing work for which you have a genetic orGodgiven
talent, and perhapsyoucouldbecomeone ofthe best in the worldin
applying thattalent. ("I feel thatI was just born tobedoing this.") Second,
you are well paid for what you do. ("I getpaid todothis? Am I dreaming?")
Third, you aredoing work you are passionate about andabsolutely love to
do, enjoying theactual process for its own sake. ("I look forward togetting
upandthrowing myself into my daily work, andI really believe in what I'm
doing.") Ifyou could drivetoward the intersection of these three circlesand
translate that intersection into a simple, crystalline concept that guided
your life choices, then you'd have a Hedgehog Concept for yourself.
Good to Great 97
To have a fully developed Hedgehog Concept, you need allthree circles.
Ifyou make a lot ofmoney doing things at which you could never be the
best, you'll only build a successful company, nota great one. Ifyou become
the best at something, you'll never remain on top ifyou don't have intrinsic ^^\
passion for what you are doing. Finally, you can be passionate all you want, /
but ifyou can't be the best at it or it doesn't make economic sense, then you /
might have a lotoffun, butyou won't produce great results. f
UNDERSTANDING WHAT YOU CAN
(AND CANNOT) BE THE BEST AT
"Theystick with whattheyunderstand and let their abilities, not their egos,
determine what they attempt."11 Sowrote Warren Buffett about his $290
million investment in Wells Fargo despite his serious reservations about
the banking industry.12 Prior to clarifying its Hedgehog Concept, Wells
Fargo had tried to be a global bank, operating like a mini-Citicorp, and a
mediocre one at that. Then, at first under Dick Cooley and then under
Carl Reichardt, Wells Fargo executives began to ask themselves a piercing
set of questions: What can we potentially do better than any other com
pany, and, equally important, what can we not do better than any other
company? And ifwe can't be the best at it, then why arewedoing it at all?
Putting aside theiregos, theWells Fargo team pulled the plugon the vast
majority ofits international operations, accepting the truth that it could not
be better than Citicorp in global banking.13 Wells Fargo then turned its
attention to what it could be the best in the world at: running a bank like a
business, with a focus on the western United States. That's it. That wasthe
essence ofthe Hedgehog ConceptthatturnedWells Fargo from a mediocre
Citicorp wanna-be to one ofthe best-performing banks in the world.
Carl Reichardt, CEO ofWells Fargo at the time of transition, stands as
a consummate hedgehog. While his counterparts at Bank of America
went into a reaction-revolution panic mode in response to deregulation,
hiringchange gurus who used sophisticated models and time-consuming
encountergroups, Reichardt stripped everything down to its essential sim
plicity.14 "It's not space science stuff," he told us in our interview. "What
we did was so simple, and wekept it simple. It was so straightforward and
obvious that it sounds almost ridiculous to talk about it. The average busi
nessman coming from a highly competitive industry with no regulations
would have jumped on this like a goose on a Junebug."15
98 Jim Collins
Reichardt kept people relentlessly focused on the simple hedgehog
idea, continually reminding them that "there's more money tobemade in
Modesto than Tokyo."16 Those who worked with Reichardt marveled at
his genius for simplicity. "IfCarl were an Olympic diver," said one of his
colleagues, "he would not do a five-flip twisting thing. Hewould do the
best swan dive in the world, and do it perfecdy over and over again."17
The Wells Fargo focus on its Hedgehog Concept was so intense that it
became, in its executives' own words, "a mantra." Throughout our inter
views, Wells Fargo people echoed the same basic theme"It wasn't that
complicated. We just took a hard-nosed look at what we were doing and
decided to focus entirely on those few things we knew we could do better
than anyone else, not getting distracted into arenas that would feed our
egosand at which we could not be the best."
'^^z-xC;. Ik
Every company would like tobethebest at something, but few actually
understandwith piercing insight and egoless claritywhat they actually
have thepotential tobethebest atand, just as important, what they cannot
bethe best at. And itis this distinction that stands as one oftheprimary con
trasts between thegood-to-great companies andthecomparison companies.
Consider the contrast between Abbott Laboratories and Upjohn. In
1964, thetwo companies were almost identical in terms ofrevenues, prof
its, and product lines. Both companies had the bulk of their business in
pharmaceuticals, principally antibiotics. Both companies had family
management. Both companies lagged behindthe rest ofthe pharmaceuti
cal industry. But then, in 1974, Abbott had a breakthrough in perfor
mance, producing cumulative returns of 4.0 times the market and 5.5
times Upjohn over the nextfifteen years. One crucial difference between
the two companies is that Abbott developed a Hedgehog Concept based
on what it could be the bestat and Upjohn did not.
Abbott began by confronting the brutal facts. By 1964, Abbott had lost
the opportunity to become the best pharmaceutical company. While
Good to Great 99
Abbott haddrowsily lumbered along in the 1940s and 1950s, living offits
cash cow, erythromycin, companies like Merck hadbuiltresearch engines
that rivaled Harvard and Berkeley. By 1964, George Cain and his Abbott
team realized that Merck and others had such a huge research lead that
trying tobethebest pharmaceutical company would belike a high school
football team trying to take on the Dallas Cowboys.
Even though Abbott's entire history lay in pharmaceuticals, becoming
the best pharmaceutical company was no longer a viable option. So,
guided by a Level 5leader and tapping into thefaith side ofthe Stockdale
Paradox (Theremustbe a way for usto prevail asa greatcompany, and we
will find it!), the Abbott team sought to understand what it could be the
best at. Around 1967, a key insight emerged: We've lost the chanceto be
the best pharmaceutical company, but we have anopportunity to excel at
creating products thatcontribute to cost-effective health care. Abbott had
experimented with hospital nutritional products, designed to helppatients
quickly regain their strength after surgery, and diagnostic devices (one of
the primary ways to reduce health care costs isthrough proper diagnosis).
Abbott eventually became the number one company in both of these are
nas, which moved it far downthe path of becoming the best company in
the world atcreating products that make health care more cost-effective.18
Upjohn never confronted the same brutal reality and continued to live
with the delusion that it could beat Merck.19 Later, when it fell even fur
ther behind the pharmaceutical leaders, it diversified into arenas whereit
definitely could not be the bestin the world, such as plastics and chemi
cals. As Upjohn fell even further behind, it returned to a focus on ethical
drugs, yetnever confronted the fact that it was just toosmall to win in the
big-stakes pharmaceutical game.20 Despite consistently spending nearly
twice the percentage of sales on R&D as Abbott, Upjohn saw its profits
dwindle to less than halfthose ofAbbott before being acquired in 1995.21
?;1$^^ dif:p$mi$e 4e|tfeea^
^yri%pw$ty%i \i:Mdjf^ the worldat
^"j^^t^ff^n^ then your bore:t>u$ines cannot form the basis, of
100 Jim Collins
Clearly, a Hedgehog Concept is not the same as a core competence.
You can have competence at something but not necessarily have the
potential tobe the best in the world at it. To use an analogy, consider the
young person who gets straight A's inhigh school calculus and scores high
onthe math part ofthe SAT, demonstrating a core competence at mathe
matics. Doesthat mean the person shouldbecomea mathematician? Not
necessarily. Suppose now that this young person goes off to college,
enrolls in math courses, and continues to earn A's, yet encounters people
who are genetically encoded for math. As one such student said after this
experience, "It would take me three hours to finish the final. Then there
were those who finished the same final in thirty minutes and earned an
A+. Their brains are just wired differendy. I could be a very competent
mathematician, but I soon realized I could never be one of the best." That
young person mightstill getpressure from parents and friends to continue
with math, saying, "But you're so good at it." Just like our young person,
many people have been pulled or have fallen intocareers where theycan
never attain complete mastery andfulfillment. Suffering from the curse of
competence but lacking a clear Hedgehog Concept, they rarely become
great at whatthey do.
The Hedgehog Conceptrequires a severe standard ofexcellence. It'snot
just about building onstrength and competence, butabout understanding
what your organization truly has the potential to be the very best at and
sticking to it. Like Upjohn, the comparison companies stuck to businesses
at which theywere "good" but couldnever be the best, or worse, launched
offin pursuit ofeasy growth andprofits in arenas where they had no hope
ofbeing the best. They made money but never became great.
Every good-to-great company eventually gained deep understanding of
this principle and pinned their futures on allocating resources to those
Good to Great 101
few arenas where they could potentiallybe the best. (See the table below.)
The comparison companies rarelyattained this understanding.
THE GOOD-TO-GREAT COMPANIES AND THE "BEST IN THE
__ WJLR1DiTLJUJULL^
This table shows the understanding the good-to-great companies attained
that formed the foundation of their shiftfrom good to great. Note: This list
does not show what the companies were alreadybest in the world at when
they began their transitions (most of these companies weren't the best at
anything); rather, it shows what they came to understand they could become
best in the world at.
Abbott Laboratories:
Could become the best at
creating a product portfolio
that lowers the cost of
health care.
Circuit City: Could
become the best at imple
menting the "4-S"model
(service, selection, savings,
satisfaction) applied to bigticket
consumer sales.
Fannie Mae: Could
become the best capital
markets player in anything
that pertains to mortgages.
Notes: Abbottconfronted the reality
that it could not becomethe bestphar
maceutical company in the world,
despite the fact that pharmaceuticals
at the time accounted for 99 percent of
its revenues.22 It shifted its focus to creat
ing a portfolio of productsthat con
tribute to lower-cost health care,
principally hospital nutritionals, diagnos
tics,and hospital supplies.
Notes: Circuit City sawthat it could
become "the McDonald's" of big-ticket
retailing,able to operate a geographi
callydispersed system by remote con
trol. Its distinction lay not in the "4-S"
model per sebut in the consistent,
superior execution of the model.
Notes:The critical insightwasto
see (1) that it could be a full capital
markets playeras good as any on
Wall Street and (2) that it could develop
a unique capability to assess risk in
mortgage-related securities.
102 Jim Collins
Gillette: Could become Notes: Gillette saw that it had an unusual
the best at buildingpremier combination of twovery differentskills:
global brandsof daily (1) the abilityto manufacture billions of
necessities that require low-cost, super-high-tolerance products
sophisticated manufacturing (e.g., razorblades) and (2) the abilityto
technology. build global consumerbrandsthe
"Coke" of blades or toothbrushes.
Kimberly-Clark: Could Notes: Kimberly-Clark realized that it
become the best in the had a latent skill at creating"categoryworld
at paper-based killer" brandsbrands where the name
consumer products. of the product is synonymous with the
name of the category (e.g.,Kleenex)
in paper-based products.
Kroger: Could become the Notes: Kroger always had a strength in
best at innovative super- grocery storeinnovation. It tookthis skill
combo stores. and applied it to the question ofhowto
createa combinationstorewith many
innovative, high-margin "mini-stores"
under one roof.
Nucor: Could become the Notes: Nucor came to see that it had
bestat harnessing culture tremendous skill in two activities:
and technology to produce (1) creatinga performance culture
low-cost steel. and (2) makingfarsighted bets on new
manufacturingtechnologies.
Bycombiningthese two,it was able to
become the lowest-cost steel
producer in the United States.
Philip Morris: Could Notes: Early in transition, Philip Morris
become the best in the saw that it could become simplythe
world at building brand besttobacco companyin the world.
loyalty in cigarettes and, Later,it began to diversify into nonlater,
other consumables. tobacco arenas (a steptakenbyall tobacco
companies,as a defensive measure), but
stayed close to itsbrand-building strengths
in "sinful" products (beer, tobacco,
chocolate,coffee) and food products.
Pitney Bowes: Could
become the best in the
worldat messaging that
requires sophisticated backofficeequipment.
Walgreens: Could become
the best at convenient drug
stores.
Wells Fargo: Could become
the best at mnning a bank
like a business, with a focus
on the western United States.
Good to Great 103
Notes: AsPitney wrestled with the
question of how to evolve beyond
postage meters, it had twokey
insights about itsstrengths: (1) that
it was not a postage company, but could
have a broader definition (messaging)
and (2) that it had particular strength in
supplying the back roomswith sophisti
cated machines.
Notes: Walgreens sawthat it was
not justa drugstore but also a conven
ience store. It began systematically seek
ing the bestsites forconvenienceclus
tering manystores within a small radius
and pioneering drive-through pharma
cies. It also made extensive investments
in technology (including recent Web
site developments), linkingWalgreen
stores worldwide to create one giant
"corner pharmacy."
Notes: Wells came to two essential
insights. First,most banksthought of
themselves as banks, acted like banks,
and protected the banker culture. Wells
sawitselfas a businessthat happened to
be in banking. "Run it like a business"
and "Run it like you own it" became
mantras. Second, Wellsrecognized that
it could not be the best in the world as a
superglobal bank, but that it could be
the best in the western United States.
104 Jim Collins
INSIGHT INTO YOUR ECONOMIC ENGINEWHAT
IS YOUR DENOMINATOR?
The good-to-great companies frequently produced spectacular returns in
very unspectacular industries. The banking industry ranked in the bottom
quartile of industries (in total returns) during the same period that
Wells Fargo beat the market by four times. Even more impressive, both
Pitney Bowes and Nucor were in bottom 5 percent industries; yet both
these companies beat the marketby well overfive times. Only one of the
good-to-great companies had the benefit of being in a great industry
(defined as a top 10 percent industry); five were in good industries; five
were in bad to terrible industries. (See Appendix 5.A for a summary of
industry analysis.)
great ;n4uptry,t-UA-w * ~~*~**~~*&~* ^~ui>^^^~^ **^ ,
parly iuHl^
They wefi al
intothefr^ondrfitesr^
wei^ abfefej 4o t^rbT#c||sie ifey^ftateMi^^ %
v^ /<., /VY^< >:V>lu iV*'F:
This is not a book on microeconomics. Each company and each indus
try had its own economic realities, and I'm not going to belabor them all
here. The central point is that each good-to-great company attained a
deep understanding of the key drivers in itseconomic engine and built its
system in accordance withthis understanding.
That said, however, we did notice one particularly provocative form of
economic insightthat every good-to-great company attained,the notion of
a single "economic denominator." Think about it in terms of the follow
ing question: If you could pick oneandonly one ratioprofit per x (or, in
the social sector, cash flow per x)to systematically increase over time, what
x would have the greatest and most sustainable impact on your economic
engine? Welearned that this single questionleadsto profound insight into
the inner workings of an organization's economics.
Recall how Walgreens switched its focus from profit per store to profit
per customer visit. Convenient locations are expensive, but by increasing
profit per customer visit, Walgreens was able to increase convenience
(nine stores in a mile!)andsimultaneously increase profitability across its
Good to Great 105
entire system. The standard metric of profitper storewould have run con
trary to the convenience concept. (The quickest way to increase profit per
store is to decrease the number of stores and put them in less expensive
locations. This would have destroyed the convenience concept.)
Or consider Wells Fargo. When the Wells team confronted the brutal
fact that deregulation would transform banking into a commodity, they
realized that standard banker metrics, like profit per loan and profit per
deposit, would no longer be the key drivers. Instead, they grasped a new
denominator: profit per employee. Following this logic, Wells Fargo
became one of the first banksto change its distribution system to rely pri
marily on stripped-down branches and ATMs.
ffe-<^nomin^of ean be quite subtle, sometimes even unobvious. The
k%i? to use thequestion of the denominator to gain understanding
arifc^
For example, Fannie Mae grasped the subtle denominator of profit per
mortgage risk level, not per mortgage (which would be the "obvious"
choice). It's a brilliant insight. The real driverin Fannie Mae's economics
is the abilityto understand risk of default in a package of mortgages better
than anyone else. Then it makes money selling insurance and managing
the spread on that risk. Simple, insightful, unobviousand right.
Nucor, for example, made its mark in the ferociously price competitive
steel industrywith the denominator profitper ton of finished steel.At first
glance, you might think that per employee or per fixed cost might be the
proper denominator. But the Nucor people understood that the driving
force in its economic engine was a combination of a strong-work-ethic
culture andthe application ofadvanced manufacturing technology. Profit
per employee or per fixed cost would not capture this duality as well as
profit per ton of finished steel.
Do you need to have a single denominator? No, but pushing for a sin
gle denominator tends to produce better insight than letting yourselfoff
the hook with three or four denominators. The denominator question
serves as a mechanism to force deeper understanding of the keydrivers in
your economic engine. As the denominator question emerged from the
research, we tested the question on a number of executive teams. We
found that the question always stimulated intense dialogue and debate.
106 )im Collins
Furthermore, even in cases where the team failed (or refused) to identify
a single denominator, the challenge ofthe question drove them to deeper
insight. Andthat is,afterall, the pointto havea denominator not for the
sake ofhaving a denominator, but for the sake ofgaining insight that ulti
mately leads to more robustand sustainable economics.
ECONOMIC DENOMINATOR
Thistable shows the economic denominator insight attained bythe good-togreatcompaniesduring
the pivotal transition years.
Abbott: per employee Keyinsight: Shiftfromprofitper prod
uct line to profitper employee fit with
the ideaof contributing to cost-effective
health care.
Circuit City: per Keyinsight: Shiftfrom profitper single
geographic region storeto profitper region reflected local
economies of scale. While per-store per
formance remained vital, regional
grouping was a keyinsightthat drove
Circuit City's economics beyond Silo's.
Fannie Mae: per mortgage Keyinsight: Shiftfromprofitper mort
risk level gage to profit per mortgage risk level
reflected the fundamental insight that
managinginterest riskreduces depen
dence on the direction of interest rates.
Gillette: per customer Keyinsight: Shiftfromprofitper divi
sion to profitper customer reflected the
economicpowerof repeatable purchases
(e.g., razor cartridges) timeshigh profit
perpurchase (e.g., Mach3, not disposable
razors).
Kimberly-Clark: per Keyinsight: Shiftfrom profitper fixed
consumer brand asset (the mills) to profitper consumer
brand; would be less cyclicaland more
profitable in goodtimes and bad.
Good to Great 107
Kroger: perlocal Key insight: Shiftfrom profit per
population storeto profitper local population
reflected the insight that local market
share drove grocery economics. Ifyou
can't attain number one or number two
in local share,youshould not play.
Nucor: pertonoffinished Keyinsight: Shiftfrom profitper
steel division to profitper ton of finished steel
reflected Nucor's unique blend of highproductivity
culture mixed with minimill
technology, rather than just
focusing on volume.
Philip Morris: pei-global Key insight: Shiftfrom profitper
brand category sales regionto profitper globalbrand
category reflected the understanding
that the real keyto greatness lay in
brandsthat could have global power,
like Coke.
Pitney Bowes: percustomer Key insight: Shiftfrom profit per
postage meter to profit per customer
reflected the idea that Pitney Bowes
could use its postage meters as a
jumping-off point to bring a range of
sophisticated products into the back
offices of customers.
Walgreens: per Key insight: Shiftfromprofitper
customer visit store to profitper customervisit reflected
a symbiotic relationship between conve
nient (and expensive) storesites and sus
tainable economics.
Wells Fargo: per employee Key insight: Shift from profit
per loan to profit per employee
reflected understanding of the brutal
fact of deregulation: Banking is
a commodity.
108 ]im Collins
All the good-to-great companies discovered a key economic denomina
tor (see the table on page 106), while the comparison companies usually
did not. In fact, we found only one comparison case that attained a pro
found insight into its economics. Hasbro built its upswing on the insight
that a portfolio of classic toys and games, suchas G.I. Joe and Monopoly,
produces more sustainable cash flow thanbigonetime hits.23 In fact, Has
bro isthe one comparison companythat understood all three circlesof the
Hedgehog Concept. It became the best in the world at acquiring and
renewingtried-and-true toys, reintroducing and recycling them at just the
righttime to increaseprofitper classic brand.Anditspeople had greatpas
sion for the business. Systematically building from all three circles, Has
bro became the best-performing comparison in our study, lending further
credence to the power ofthe Hedgehog Concept.
Hasbrobecame an unsustained transition in part because it lost the dis
cipline to stay within the three circles, afterthe unexpecteddeath ofCEO
Stephen Hassenfeld. The Hasbro case reinforces a vital lesson. Ifyou suc
cessfully apply these ideas, butthen stop doing them, you will slide back
ward, from great togood, orworse. The only way to remain great is to keep
applying the fundamental principles that made you great
UNDERSTANDING YOUR PASSION
When interviewing the Philip Morris executives, we encountered an
intensityand passion that surprised us. Recall from chapter 3 how George
Weissman described working at the company as the greatloveaffair of his
life, second only to his marriage. Even with a most sinful collection of
consumerproducts (Marlboro cigarettes, Millerbeer, 67 percent fat-filled
Velveeta, Maxwell House coffee for caffeine addicts, Toblerone for choco
holics,and so forth),wefound tremendouspassion for the business. Most
of the top executives at Philip Morris were passionate consumers of their
own products. In 1979,Ross Millhiser, then vice chairman of Philip Mor
ris and a dedicated smoker, said, "I love cigarettes. It's one of the things
that makes life really worth living."24
The Philip Morris people clearly loved their companyand had passion
for what they were doing. It's as if they viewed themselves as the lone,
fiercely independent cowboy depicted in the Marlboro billboards. "We
have a right to smoke, and we will protect that right!" A board member
told me during myresearch fora previous project, "I really love being on
Good to Great 109
the board ofPhilip Morris. It's like being partofsomething really special."
She said this as she proudly puffed away.25
Now, you might say, "But that is just the defensiveness of the tobacco
industry. Ofcourse they'd feel that way. Otherwise, how could they sleep
at night?" But keep in mind that R. J. Reynolds was also in the tobacco
business and under siege from society. Yet, unlike Philip Morris, R. J.
Reynolds executives began to diversify away from tobacco into any arena
where it could get growth, regardless ofwhether they had passion for those
acquisitions or whether the company could be the best in the world at
them. The Philip Morris people stuck much closer to the tobacco busi
ness, in large part because they loved that business. In contrast, the R. J.
Reynolds people saw tobacco as just a way to make money. As vividly
portrayed in the book Barbarians at the Gate, R. J. Reynolds executives
eventually lost passion for anything except making themselves rich
through a leveraged buyout.26
Itmay seem odd to talk about something as soft andfuzzy as "passion" as
an integral part of a strategic framework. But throughout the good-togreat
companies, passion became a key part of the Hedgehog Concept.
You can'tmanufacture passion or"motivate" people tofeel passionate. You
can only discover what ignites your passion and the passions of those
around you.
^^ cm get passionate about
|^iA^^b%^^r^t^l^^^ox^fetiti^3?;^ft^^^tFi^^Fii*t.-torpapers-based -consumer
V^p^iid|'iii lf*r|e&rt^^ passionate about
b"$^ products are okay,
When Gillette executives made the choice to build sophisticated, rela
tively expensive shaving systems rather than fight a low-margin battle with
disposables, they did so inlarge part because they just couldn't get excited
about cheap disposable razors. "Zeien talks about shaving systems with
the sort of technical gusto one expects from a Boeing or Hughes engi
neer," wrote one journalist about Gillette's CEO in 1996.28 Gillette has
always been at its best when it sticks to businesses that fit its Hedgehog
no ]im Collins
Concept. "People who aren't passionate about Gillette need not apply,"
wrote a Wall Street Journal reporter, whowent on to describe how a top
business school graduate wasn't hired because she didn't show enough
passion for deodorant.29
Perhaps you, too, can't get passionate about deodorant. Perhaps you
might find it hardto imagine being passionate aboutpharmacies, grocery
stores, tobacco, or postage meters. You might wonder about what type of
person gets all jazzed upabout making a bank as efficient as McDonald's,
or who considers a diaper charismatic. In the end, it doesn'treally matter.
The point is that they felt passionate about what they were doing and the
passion was deep and genuine.
This doesn't mean, however, that you have to be passionate about the
mechanics of the business per se (although you might be). The passion
circle can be focused equally on what the company stands for. Forexam
ple, the Fannie Mae people were not passionate about the mechanical
process of packaging mortgages into market securities. But they were
terrifically motivated by the whole idea of helping people of all classes,
backgrounds, and races realize the American dream ofowning their home.
Linda Knight, who joined Fannie Mae in 1983, just as thecompany faced
its darkest days, told us: "This wasn't justany old company getting into
trouble; thiswas a company at the core ofmaking homeownership a real
ity for thousands ofAmericans. It's a role thatis far more important than
just making money, and that's why we felt such depth ofcommitment to
preserve, protect, and enhance the company."30 As another Fannie Mae
executive summed up, "I see usas a key mechanism for strengthening the
whole social fabric ofAmerica. Whenever I drive through difficult neigh
borhoods thatarecoming back because more families own theirhomes, I
return to work reenergized."
THE TRIUMPH OF UNDERSTANDING
OVER BRAVADO
On the research team, we frequently found ourselves talking aboutthe dif
ference between "prehedgehog" and "posthedgehog" states. In the prehedgehog
state, it's like groping through the fog. You're making progress
on a long march, but you can't see all that well. At each juncture in the
trail, you can only see a little bit ahead and must move at a deliberate,
slow crawl. Then, with the Hedgehog Concept, you break into a clearing,
Good to Great 111
the fog lifts, and you can see for miles. From then on, each juncture
requires less deliberation, and you can shiftfrom crawl to walk, and from
walk to run. In the posthedgehog state, miles oftrail move swiftly beneath
your feet, forks in the road fly past asyou quickly make decisions that you
couldnot have seensoclearly in the fog.
What's so striking about thecomparison companies is thatfor all their
change programs, frantic gesticulations, and charismatic leadersthey
rarely emerged from thefog. They would try to run,making bad decisions
at forks in the road, and then have to reverse course later. Or they would
veer off the trail entirely, banging into trees and tumbling down
ravines.(Oh, but they were sure doing it with speed and panache!)
/r$f& 4h^#pj^^^ *wortel "that had -
^becoiMy^ot^ple and clear to th good-to-great companies
'^j|fen^ treasons, First,
Nowhere is this more evident than in the comparison companies'
mindless pursuit ofgrowth: Over two thirds ofthe comparison companies
displayed an obsession with growth without the benefit of a Hedgehog
Concept.31 Statements such as "We've been a growth at any price com
pany" and "Betting that size equals success" pepper the materials on the
comparison companies. In contrast, not one of the good-to-great compa
nies focused obsessively on growth. Yet they created sustained, profitable
growth far greater thanthe comparison companies thatmade growth their
mantra.
Consider the case ofGreat Western and Fannie Mae. "Great Western is
a mite unwieldy," wrote the Wall Street Transcript "It wants to grow
everyway it can."32 The company found itself in finance, leasing, insur
ance, and manufactured houses, continually acquiring companies in an
expansion binge.33 Bigger! More! In 1985, Great Western's CEO told a
gathering of analysts, "Don't worry about what you call usa bank, an
S&L, or a Zebra."34
Quite a contrastto Fannie Mae,whichhad a simple, crystalline under
standing that it could be the best capital markets player in anything
112 Jim Collins
related to mortgages, better even than Goldman Sachs or Salomon Broth
ers in opening up the full capital markets to the mortgage process. It built
a powerful economic machine by reframing its business model on risk
management, rather than mortgage selling. And it drove the machine
with great passion, the Fannie Mae people inspired by its vital role in
democratizing home ownership.
Until 1984, the stock charts tracked each otherlikemirrorimages. Then
in 1984, one year after it clarified its Hedgehog Concept, Fannie Mae
exploded upward, while Great Western kept lollygagging along until just
before its acquisition in 1997. By focusing on its simple, elegant concep
tionand not just focusing on "growth"Fannie Mae grew revenues
nearly threefold from its transition year in 1984 through 1996. GreatWest
ern, for all of its gobbling of growth steroids, grew revenues and earnings
only 25 percent over the same period, thenlost its independence in 1997.
The Hedgehog Concept is a turning point in the journey from good
to great. In most cases, the transition date follows within a few years of
the Hedgehog Concept. Furthermore, everything from here on out in
the book hinges upon having the Hedgehog Concept. As will become
abundantly clear in the following chapters, disciplined actionthe
third big chunk in the framework after disciplined people and disci
plined thoughtonly makes sense in the context of the Hedgehog
Concept.
Despite its vital importance (or, rather, because ofits vital importance),
it would be a terrible mistake to thoughtlessly attempt to jump right to a
Hedgehog Concept. You can't just go off-site for two days, pull out a
bunch of flip charts, do breakout discussions, and come up with a deep
understanding. Well, you can do that, butyou probably won't getit right.
It would be like Einsteinsaying, "I think it'stime to become a greatscien
tist, so I'm going to go off to the Four Seasons this weekend, pull out the
flip charts, and unlock the secrets of the universe." Insight just doesn't
Good to Great 113
Fannie Mae, Great Western, and the General Market
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1970-1984
$10
1970 1977
Notes:
1. Shows cumulative value of $1 invested December 31,1970 -
2. Dividends reinvested.
January 1,1984.
General Market:
$3.56
Great Western:
$2.35
Fannie Mae:
$1.77
1984
Fannie Mae, Great Western, and the General Market
Cumulative Value of $1 Invested,
1984-2000
$80
1984 1992
Notes:
1. Fannie Mae transition point occurred in 1984.
2. Cumulativevalue of $1 invested December 31,1984 - January 1, 2000.
3. Dividends reinvested.
Fannie Mae: $64.17
General Market:
$11.53
2000
114 Jim Collins
happen that way. It took Einstein ten years of groping through the fog to
getthe theory ofspecial relativity, andhe was a bright guy.35
It took about four years on average for the good-to-great companies to
clarify their Hedgehog Concepts. Like scientific insight, a Hedgehog
Concept simplifies a complex world and makes decisions much easier.
But while it has crystalline clarity and elegantsimplicity once you haveit,
getting the concept can be devilishly difficult and takes time. Recognize
that getting a Hedgehog Conceptisan inherently iterative process, not an
event.
The essence ofthe process isto getthe rightpeople engaged in vigorous
dialogue anddebate, infused with the brutal facts andguided byquestions
formed bythe three circles. Dowe really understand what we can be the
best in the world at, as distinct from what we can just be successfulat? Do
we really understand the drivers in our economic engine, including our
economic denominator? Do we really understand what best ignites our
passion?
One particularly useful mechanism for moving the process along is a
Ask Questions,
Guided by the Three Circles
r
Autopsies and Analysis, THE Dialogue and Debate,
Guided by r* Guided by
the Three Cirlces COUNCIL the Three Circles
J
Executive Decisions,
Guided by the Three Circles
Getting the Hedgehog Concept
An Iterative Process
Good to Great 115
device that we came to call the Council. The Council consists of a group
of the right people who participate in dialogue and debate guided by the
three circles, iteratively and overtime, about vital issues and decisionsfac
ing the organization. (See "Characteristics of the Council," below.)
In response to the question, "How should we go about getting our
Hedgehog Concept?" I would point to the diagram on page 114and say:
"Build the Council, and use that as a model. Ask the right questions,
engage in vigorous debate, make decisions, autopsy the results, and
learnall guided within the context of the three circles. Just keep going
through that cycle of understanding."
When asked, "Howdo weaccelerate the process of gettinga Hedgehog
Concept?"I wouldrespond: "Increase the number oftimesyougoaround
that full cycle in a given period of time." If you go through this cycle
enough times, guided resolutely by the three circles, you will eventually
gainthe depth of understanding required for a Hedgehog Concept. It will
not happen overnight, but it will eventually happen.
Characteristics of the Council
1 The council exists as a device to gain understanding about jifipor-
,-/.' tanf!issuesfacingthe organization.
%TheCouncil is asbembleci and used by the leading executive and
; usually qdo^ists offive to twelve p
& Each Council member has the ability to argue and debate in
, ,; search of understanding, not from the egoistic need to win a point
;f or protect a parochial interest
4 E$ch' Pound) member retain^ the respect of every other Council
.;' member, v^/fftoui[exception.
. ;$; Council members corne from a range of perspectives, but each
, member has deep knowledge about some aspect o^ the organiza-
/ tiqa^nd/or the environment inwhich itoperates. , /
& The Council includes key members of the management team but
: , ;/ is not limited to member^ of the management tean\ npr is every
executive automatically a member.
;7NThe Cauncil is a standing body, not an ad hoc committee assem-
*;^bledfora specific project. ,/
,.4;The pbtiiicil $eet$ pSriqdically, as much as once"a week or as
/; infrequently as once per quarter
116 Jim Collins
:9, The, Goju$cil? does notseel^on^ejis^^ cppsensus/
decisionsiare ptten at: odds;with inyitdeht decisions. The
responsibility for the JfnaWe^sipn ^rrfajris .with, the leveling.
\<, executive;, *;?'''** -:^: '-V'^ s \ / ^ '~N'< "V* ' (V.. -
*10, Jhe;PouocH tsan informal bod^/n^/listedjpn.anyformal organiza
tion ch%rt or in any formaldocuments, r *- . > '* ;V
31. The Council c^rhhave &r^gp ^fe^sible' narpesvxf^uaHy quite
- innocuous^ In the 0o&to$mst complniesi they Ma^l benign
names like LongH^ange profit Improvement Committe%pp^orate
Products Committee,(StfategifcThiriking Grou$and Executive
': Council.'.. - ' V-- Xv #"'-*. ;'. x\ ' :-r '.'-v-
Does every organization have a Hedgehog Concept to discover? What
if you wake up, look around with brutal honesty, and conclude: "We're
not the best at anything,and weneverhavebeen." Therein lies one of the
mostexciting aspects ofthe entirestudy. In the majority ofcases, the goodto-
great companies were not the bestin the world at anything and showed
no prospects of becoming so. Infused with the Stockdale Paradox ("There
must be something we can become the best at, and we will find it! We
must also confront the brutal facts of what we cannot be the best at, and
we will not delude ourselves!"), every good-to-great company, no matter
howawful at the startofthe process, prevailed in itssearchfora Hedgehog
Concept.
As you search for your own concept, keep in mindthat whenthe goodto-
great companies finally grasped their Hedgehog Concept, it had none
ofthe tiresome, irritating blasts ofmindless bravado typical of the compar
ison companies. "Yep, we could be the best at that" was stated as the
recognition of a fact, no more startling than observing that the sky is blue
or the grass is green. When you get your Hedgehog Concept right, it has
the quiet pingoftruth, likea single, clear, perfectly strucknote hangingin
the air in the hushed silence of a full auditorium at the end of a quiet
movement of a Mozart piano concerto. There is no need to saymuch of
anything; the quiet truth speaks for itself.
Fm reminded ofa personal experience in myownfamily that illustrates
the vital difference betweenbravado and understanding. Mywife, Joanne,
began racing marathons and triathlons in the early 1980s. As she accumu
lated experiencetrack times, swim splits, race resultsshe beganto feel
Good to Great 117
the momentum of success. One day, she entered a race with many of the
best woman triathletes in the world,anddespite a weakswim where she
came out of the water hundreds of places behind the top swimmers and
having to push a heavy, nonaerodynamic bike up a long hillshe man
aged to cross the finish line in the top ten.
Then, a few weeks later while sitting at breakfast, Joanne looked up
from her morning newspaper and calmly, quietly said, "I think I could
win the Ironman."
The Ironman, the worldchampionship of triathlons, involves 2.4 miles
of ocean swimming and 112 miles of cycling, capped offwith a 26.2-mile
marathon footrace on the hot, lava-baked Kona coast of Hawaii.
"Of course, I'd have to quit my job, turn down my offers to graduate
school (shehad been admittedto graduate business school at a number of
the top schools), and commit to full-time training. But..."
Her words had no bravado in them, no hype, no agitation, no pleading.
She didn't tryto convinceme. She simply observed whatshe had come to
understand was a fact, a truth no more shocking than statingthat the walls
were painted white. She had the passion. She had the genetics.And if she
wonraces, she'd havethe economics. The goal to winthe Ironman flowed
from early understanding of her Hedgehog Concept.
And, so, she decided to go for it. She quit her job. She turned down
graduate schools. She sold the mills! (But she did keep me on her bus.)
And three years later, on a hot October dayin 1985, she crossed the finish
line at the Hawaii Ironman in first place, world champion. When Joanne
set out to win the Ironman, she did not know if she would become the
world's best triathlete. But she understood that she could, that it was in the
realm of possibility, that she was not living in a delusion. Andthat distinc
tion makes all the difference. It is a distinction that thosewho wantto go
from good to great must grasp, and one that those who fail to become
great so often never do.
H EDO E H 0 Q 0 O NC E P T
( S I W P II C I T Y WITHIN T H E T H R E E C I R C L E $-);
. *:"? "',;.' ' ', KEY-POINTS  '''  /* :
 To go from good to great requires a deep un<Jerstan4^g o three
intersecting circles translated intoa simple, crystalline concept(the
Hedgehog Concepit): ;:
What you are deeply
passionateabout
What you can T^^*^^1 What drives bethbbestin \ / YOUR
THE WORLD AT \ / ECONOMIC
/ ENGINE
Three Circles of the Hedgehog Concept
The keyis to understand whatyourorganization can be the best in
the world at,andequally important what it cannot be the best at
notwhatit 'wants"to be the bestat The Hedgehog Conceptisnot
a goal, strategy, or intention; it isan understanding.
Ifyoucannotbe the bestin the world at yourcons business, then your
corebusiness cannotform the basis ofyour Hedgehog Concept
The "bestin the world" understanding isa much moresevere stan
dard than a core competence. You mighthave 3 competence but
notnecessarily have thecapacity tobetruly thebest iri theworld at
Good to Great 119
that competence. Conversely, there may be activities at which you
could become the best in the world, but at which you have no cur
rent competence.
 Toget insight intothe drivers ofyour economic engine, search for
the one denominator (profit perx or, in the social sector, cashflow
per x) that has the single greatest impact.
 Oc)od-to-gr#t companies set their goals and strategies based on
understanding; comparison companies set their goals and strategies
^based on bravado.
 Getting the Hedgehog Concept is an iterative process. The Coun
cil can be a useful device.
UNEXPECTED FINDINGS
 The good-to-great companies are more like hedgehogssimple,
dowdy creatures thatknow "onebigthing" and stick to it The com
parison companies are more like foxescrafty, cunning creatures
that knowmanythingsyet lack consistency.
 It tookfour years on average for the good-to-great companies to get
a Hedgehog Concept
 Strategy per se did not separate the good-to-great companies from
the comparison companies. Bothsets had strategies, and there is no
evidence that the good-to-great companies spent more time on
strategic planningthan the comparison companies.
 You absolutely do not need to be in a greatindustry to producesus
tainedgreatresults. Nomatter how bad the industry, every good-togreatcompany
figured outhow to produce truly superior economic
returns.
C H A P T E R
Level5 FirstWho. .. Confront the Hedgehog |
Leadership Then What Brutal Facts Concept
Technology
Accelerators
Freedom is onlypart ofthe story and half the truth.... That
iswhy I recommend that the Statue ofLiberty on the East
Coastbe supplanted bya Statue ofResponsibility on the West
Coast.
Viktor E. Frankl,
Man's Search for Meaning1
in 1980, George Rathmann cofounded the biotechnology company
Amgen. Over the next twenty years, Amgen grew from a struggling entre
preneurial enterprise into a $3.2 billion company with 6,400 employees,
creating blood products to improve the lives of people suffering through
chemotherapy and kidney dialysis.2 Under Rathmann, Amgen became
one of the few biotechnology companies that delivered consistent prof
itability and growth. It became so consistently profitable, in fact, that its
stock pricemultiplied over 150 times from its public offering in June 1983
toJanuary 2000. Aninvestor who bought as little as$7,000 ofAmgen stock
would have realized a capital gainofover $1 million, thirteen timesbetter
than the sameinvestment in the general stock market.
Few successful start-ups become great companies, in large partbecause
Good to Great 121
they respond to growth and success in the wrong way. Entrepreneurial
success is fueled by creativity, imagination, bold moves into uncharted
waters, and visionary zeal. As a company grows and becomes more com
plex, it begins to trip over its own successtoo many new people, too
many new customers, too many new orders, too many new products.
Whatwas once great fun becomes an unwieldy ball of disorganized stuff.
Lack of planning, lack of accounting, lack of systems, and lack of hiring
constraints create friction. Problems surfacewith customers, with cash
flow, with schedules.
In response, someone (often a board member) says, "It'stime to grow up.
Thisplaceneeds some professional management." The company begins to
hire MBAs and seasoned executives from blue-chip companies. Processes,
procedures, checklists, and all the rest begin to sprout up like weeds. What
was once an egalitarian environment gets replaced with a hierarchy.
Chains of command appear for the first time. Reporting relationships
become clear, and an executive class with special perks begins to appear.
"We" and "they" segmentations appearjust like in a real company.
The professional managers finally rein in the mess. They create order
out of chaos, but theyalso kill the entrepreneurial spirit. Members of the
founding team begin to grumble, "This isn't fun anymore. I used to be
able to justget things done. Now I have to fill out these stupid forms and
follow these stupid rules. Worst of all, I have to spend a horrendous
amount of time in useless meetings." The creative magic begins to wane
assome ofthe most innovative people leave, disgusted bythe burgeoning
bureaucracy and hierarchy. The exciting start-up transforms into just
another company, with nothing special to recommend it. The cancer of
mediocrity begins to grow in earnest.
George Rathmannavoided thisentrepreneurial death spiral. He under
stood that the purpose ofbureaucracy isto compensate for incompetence
and lack of disciplinea problem that largely goes away if you have the
right people in the first place. Most companies build their bureaucratic
rules to manage the small percentage ofwrong people on the bus, which
in turn drives away the right people on the bus, which then increases the
percentage of wrong people on the bus, which increases the need for
more bureaucracy to compensate for incompetence and lack of disci-*
pline, which then further drives the right people away, and soforth. Rath
mann also understood an alternative exists: Avoid bureaucracy and
hierarchy and instead create a culture of discipline. When you put these
two complementary forces togethera culture of discipline with an ethic
122 Jim Collins
of entrepreneurshipyou get a magical alchemyof superior performance
and sustained results.
The Good-to-Great Matrix of Creative Discipline
Hierarchical
Organization
Great
Organization
Bureaucratic
Organization
Start-up
Organization
Low Ethic of
Entrepreneurship
High
High
Culture of
Discipline
Low
Why start this chapter with a biotechnology entrepreneur rather than
one of our good-to-great companies? Because Rathmanncredits much of
his entrepreneurial success to what he learned while working at Abbott
Laboratories before founding Amgen:
WhatI gotfrom Abbott was the idea thatwhen you setyour objectives for
the year, you record them in concrete. You can change your plans
through the year, but you never change what you measure yourself
against. You are rigorous at the end ofthe year, adhering exactly to what
yousaidwas going to happen. You don't geta chance to editorialize. You
don't geta chanceto adjust and finagle, and decide thatyoureally didn't
intend to do that anyway, and readjust your objectives to make yourself
look better. You never just focus on what you've accomplished for the
year; youfocus on whatyou've accomplished relative to exactly whatyou
saidyou weregoingto accomplishno matterhowtough the measure.
Thatwas a discipline learned atAbbott, andthatwe carried intoAmgen.3
Good to Great 123
Many of the Abbott disciplines trace back to 1968, when it hired a
remarkable financial officer named Bernard H. Semler. Semler did not see
his job as a traditional financial controller or accountant Rather, he set out
to inventmechanismsthat woulddrive culturalchange. He createda whole
new framework of accounting that he called Responsibility Accounting,
whereinevery item ofcost, income,and investment would be clearly identi
fied with a single individual responsible for thatitem.4 The idea, radical for
the 1960s, was to createa system whereinevery Abbott managerin every type
of job was responsible for his or her return on investment, with the same
rigor that an investor holds an entrepreneur responsible. There would be no
hiding behind traditional accounting allocations, no slopping funds about
to cover up ineffective management, no opportunities for finger-pointing.5
But the beautyof the Abbott system laynot justin its rigor, but in how it
used rigor and discipline to enable creativity and entrepreneurship.
"Abbott developed a very disciplined organization, but not in a linear way
of thinking," said George Rathmann. "[It] was exemplary at having both
financial discipline and the divergent thinking of creative work. We used
financial discipline as a way to provide resources for the really creative
work."6 Abbott reduced its administrative costs as a percentage of sales to
the lowest in the industry (by a significant margin) and at the same time
became a newproduct innovation machine like 3M,deriving up to 65 per
cent of revenues from newproducts introduced in the previous fouryears.7
This creativedualityran through every aspectofAbbottduring the tran
sition era, woven into the veryfabric of the corporate culture. On the one
hand, Abbottrecruited entrepreneurial leadersand gave them freedom to
determine the best path to achieving their objectives. On the other hand,
individuals had to commit fully to the Abbottsystem and were held rigor
ously accountable for their objectives. They had freedom, but freedom
within a framework. Abbott instilled the entrepreneur's zeal for oppor
tunistic flexibility. ("We recognized that planning is priceless, but plans
are useless," said one Abbott executive.)8 But Abbott also had the disci
pline to say no to opportunities that failed the three circles test. While
encouraging wide-ranging innovationwithin its divisions, Abbott simulta
neouslymaintained fanatical adherence to its HedgehogConcept of con
tributing to cost-effective health care.
Abbott Laboratories exemplifies a key finding ofour study: a culture of 1
discipline. Byits nature, "culture" isa somewhatunwieldytopic to discuss,
less prone to clean frameworks like the three circles. The main points of
this chapter, however,boil down to one central idea: Builda culture full of
124 Jim Collins
people who take disciplined action within the three circles, fanatically con
sistent with the Hedgehog Concept
More precisely, this meansthe following:
1. Build a culture around the idea offreedom and responsibility, within a
framework.
2. Fill that culture with self-disciplined people who are willing to go to
extreme lengths to fulfill their responsibilities. They will "rinse their
cottage cheese."
3. Don't confusea culture of discipline with a tyrannical disciplinarian.
4. Adhere withgreatconsistency to the Hedgehog Concept, exercising an
almost religious focus on the intersection of the three circles. Equally
important, createa "stop doinglist" and systematically unplug anything
extraneous.
FREEDOM (AND RESPONSIBILITY)
WITHIN A FRAMEWORK
Picturean airline pilot. She settles into the cockpit, surroundedby dozens
of complicated switches and sophisticated gauges, sitting atop a massive
$84million pieceofmachinery. As passengers thump and stufftheir bags
into overhead bins and flight attendants scurry about trying to get every
one settled in, she beginsher preflight checklist. Step by methodical step,
she systematically moves through every required item.
Cleared for departure, she begins working with air traffic control, fol
lowing precise instructions-which direction to takeout ofthe gate, which
way to taxi, which runway to use, which direction to take off. She doesn't
throttle up and hurtle the jet into the air until she's cleared for takeoff.
Once aloft, she communicates continuallywith flight-control centers and
stays within the tight boundaries of the commercialair traffic system.
On approach,however, she hitsa ferocious thunder-and-hail storm. Blast
ing winds, crossways and unpredictable, tilt the wings downto the left, then
down to the right. Looking outthe windows, passengers can'tseethe ground,
onlythe thinningand thickening globs ofgray clouds and the spatter of rain
on the windows. The flight attendants announce, "Ladies and gentlemen,
we've been asked to remainseated forthe remainder ofthe flight. Please put
yourseats in the upright and locked position and placeallyourcarry-on bag
gage under the seatin frontofyou. Weshouldbe on the groundshortly."
Good to Great 125
"Not tooshortly, I hope," think the lessexperienced travelers, unnerved
by the roiling wind and momentary flashes of lightning. But the experi
enced travelers justgo on readingmagazines, chatting with seatmates, and
preparing for their meetings on the ground. "I've been through all this
before," they think. "She'll only land if it's safe."
Sure enough, on final approachwheels downas a quarter of a million
pounds of steel glides down at 130 miles per hourpassengers suddenly
hear the engines whine and feel themselves thrust back into their seats.
The plane accelerates back into the sky. It banks around in a big arc back
toward the airport. The pilot takes a moment to click on the intercom:
"Sorry, folks. We weregettingsome bad crosswinds there. We're going to
give it another try." On the next go, the winds calm just enough and she
brings the plane down, safely.
Now take a step back and think about the model here. The pilot oper
ates within a very strict system, and she does not have freedom to go out
side of that system. (You don't wantairline pilots saying, "Hey, I just read
in a management bookabout the value ofbeing empoweredfreedom to
experiment, to be creative, to be entrepreneurial, to try a lot of stuff and
keep what works!") Yetat the same time, the crucial decisionswhether
to take off, whether to land, whether to abort, whether to land else
whererest with the pilot Regardless of the strictures of the system, one
central fact stands out above all others: The pilot has ultimate responsibil
ityfor the airplane and the lives of the people on it.
The point here is not that a companyshould have a system as strictand
inflexible as the air traffic system. After all, if a corporate system fails, peo
ple don't die by the hundreds in burning, twisted hunks of steel. Cus
tomer service at the airlines might be terrible, but you are almost certain
to get whereyou are going in one piece. The point of this analogy is that
when welooked insidethe good-to-great companies, wewerereminded of
the best part of the airline pilot model: freedom and responsibility within
the framework of a highly developed system.
^fftfei^c^drtprgreat companies ftuttta Consistentsystemwith, clear con-
4sjbBints4Ibut Iheyalso gave> .peoplefreedom and responsibility within
/?Jteiframevyo/k pfethat syste^ Tt(%hired .self-disciplined people who.
- ^drtt.rieedto-be managed,' and tfe&n managed the system,:not the
126 Jim Collins
"This was the secret to how we were able to run stores from a great dis
tance, by remote control," saidBill Rivas of Circuit City. "It was the com
bination of great store managers who had ultimate responsibility for their
individual stores, operating within a greatsystem. You've got to haveman
agement and people who believe in the system and who do whatever is
necessary to makethe system work. But within the boundaries of that sys
tem, store managers had a lot ofleeway, to coincidewith their responsibil
ity."9 In a sense, Circuit City became to consumer electronics retailing
what McDonald's became to restaurantsnot the most exquisite experi
ence, but an enormously consistent one. The system evolved over time as
Circuit City experimentedbyaddingnewitemslike computers and video
players (justlike McDonald'sadded breakfast EggMcMuffins). But at any
given moment, everyone operated within the framework of the system.
"That's one of the major differences between us and all the others who
were in this same business in the early 1980s," said Bill Zierden. "They
justcouldn't roll it out further,and wecould.Wecould stamp these stores
out all over the country, with great consistency."10 Therein liesone ofthe
keyreasons whyCircuit City tookoffin the early 1980s and beat the gen
eral stockmarket by more than eighteen times overthe next fifteen years.
In a sense,much of this bookisabout creatinga culture of discipline. It
all starts with disciplined people. The transition begins not bytryingto dis
cipline the wrong people into the right behaviors, but by getting selfdisciplined
people on the bus in the first place. Nextwe have disciplined
thought. You need the discipline to confront the brutal facts of reality,
while retaining resolute faith that you can and will create a path to great
ness. Most importantly, you need the disciplineto persistin the search for
understanding until you get your Hedgehog Concept. Finally, we have
disciplined action, the primary subject of this chapter. This order is
important.The comparison companies often tried to jump right to disci
plined action. But disciplined action without self-disciplined people is
impossible to sustain, and disciplined action without disciplined thought
is a recipe for disaster.
Indeed, discipline by itself will not produce great results. We find
plentyof organizations in history that had tremendous discipline and that
marched right into disaster, withprecision and in nicelyformedlines. No,
the point is to first get self-disciplined peoplewho engage in very rigorous
thinking, who then take disciplined action within the framework ofa con
sistentsystem designed around the Hedgehog Concept.
Good to Great 127
RINSING YOUR COTTAGE CHEESE
Throughout our research, we were struck by the continual use of words
like disciplined, rigorous, dogged, determined, diligent, precise, fastidious,
systematic, methodical, workmanlike, demanding, consistent, focused,
accountable, and responsible. They peppered articles, interviews, and
source materials on the good-to-great companies, and were strikingly
absentfrom the materials on the direct comparison companies. People in
thegood-to-great companies became somewhat extreme in thefulfillment
of their responsibilities, bordering in some cases on fanaticism.
Wecameto call thisthe "rinsing your cottage cheese" factor. The anal
ogy comes from a disciplined world-class athlete named Dave Scott, who
wonthe Hawaii IronmanTriathlonsix times. In training, Scottwouldride
his bike 75 miles, swim 20,000 meters, and run 17 mileson average,
every single day. Dave Scott did not have a weight problem! Yet he
believed that a low-fat, high-carbohydrate diet would give him an extra
edge. So, Dave Scotta man who burned at least 5,000 calories a day
in trainingwould literally rinse his cottage cheese to get the extra fat
off. Now, there is no evidence that he absolutely needed to rinse his
cottage cheese to win the Ironman; that's not the pointof the story. The
point is that rinsing his cottage cheese was simply one more small step
that he believed would make him just that much better, one more small
step added to all the other small steps to create a consistent program
of superdiscipline. I've always pictured Dave Scott running the 26 miles
ofthe marathonhammering away in hundred-degree heat on the black,
baked lava fields of the Konacoastafterswimming 2.4 miles in the ocean
and cycling 112 miles against ferocious crosswindsand thinking to
128 Jim Collins
himself: "Compared to rinsing my cottage cheese every day, this just isn't
that bad."
I realize thatit's a bizarre analogy. But ina sense, thegood-to-great com
panies became like Dave Scott. Much of the answer to the question of
"good to great" liesin the discipline to do whatever it takes to becomethe
best within carefully selected arenas and then to seek continual improve
mentfrom there. It's really just thatsimple. And it's really just thatdifficult.
Consider Wells Fargo in contrast to Bank of America. Carl Reichardt
never doubted thatWells Fargo could emerge from bank deregulation as a
stronger company, not a weaker one. He saw that the key to becoming a
greatcompany rested not with brilliant newstrategies but with the sheer
determination to rip a hundred years of banker mentality out of the sys
tem. "There's too much waste in banking," said Reichardt. "Getting ridof
it takes tenacity, not brilliance."11
Reichardt seta clear tone atthetop: We're notgoing toask everyone else
tosuffer while we sit onhigh. We will start by rinsing ourown cottage cheese,
right here in the executive suite. Hefroze executive salaries for two years
(despite the fact thatWells Fargo was enjoying some ofthe most profitable
years in its history).12 He shut the executive dining room and replaced it
witha college dormfood-service caterer.13 He closed the executive elevator,
sold the corporate jets, andbanned green plants from the executive suite as
too expensive to water.14 He removed free coffee from the executive suite.
Heeliminated Christmas trees for management.15 Hethrew reports back at
peoplewho'd submitted them in fancy binders, with the admonishment:
"Would you spend your own money this way? Whatdoes a binder add to
anything?"16 Reichardt would sit through meetings with fellow executives,
in a beat-up old chairwith the stuffing hanging out. Sometimes he would
justsit there and pickat the stuffing while listening to proposals to spend
money, said onearticle, "[and] a lotofmust-do projects just melted away."17
Across the street at Bank ofAmerica, executives also faced deregulation
andrecognized the need toeliminate waste. However, unlike Wells Fargo,
Good to Great 129
B of A executives didn't have the discipline to rinse their own cottage
cheese. Theypreserved theirposh executive kingdom in its imposing tower
in downtown San Francisco, the CEO's office described in the book
Breaking the Bank as"a northeast corner suite with a large attached confer
ence room, oriental rugs, and floor-to-ceiling windows that offered a sweep
ing panorama of the San Francisco Bay from the Golden Gate to the Bay
Bridge."18 (We found no evidence of executive chairs with the stuffing
hanging out.) The elevator made its last stop at the executive floor and
descended all the way to the ground in one quiet whoosh, unfettered by
the intrusions of lesser beings. The vast open space in the executive suite
made the windows look even taller than they actually were, creating a
sense of floating above the fog in an elevated cityof alien elites who ruled
theworld from above.19 Why rinse ourcottage cheese when life is so good?
After losing $1.8 billion across threeyears in the mid-1980s, BofAeven
tually made the necessary changes in response to deregulation (largely by
hiring ex-Wells executives).20 Buteven in the darkest days, BofAcould not
bring itselfto get rid of the perks that shielded its executives from the real
world. Atone board meeting during Bank ofAmerica's crisis period, one
member made sensible suggestions like "Sell the corporate jet." Other
directors listened to the recommendations, then passed them by.21
A CULTURE, NOT A TYRANT
We almostdidn't include this chapter in the book. On the one hand, the
good-to-great companies became more disciplined than the direct com
parison companies, as with Wells Fargo in contrast to Bank of America.
On the other hand, the unsustained comparisons showed themselves to be
justas disciplined as the good-to-great companies.
"Based on my analysis, I don't think we can put discipline in the book
as a finding," said Eric Hagen, after he completed a special analysis unit
looking at the leadership cultures across the companies. "It is absolutely
clear that the unsustained comparison CEOs brought tremendous disci
pline to theircompanies, andthatis why they gotsuch great initial results.
So, discipline just doesn't pass muster as a distinguishing variable."
Curious, we decided to look further into the issue, and Eric undertook
a more in-depth analysis. As wefurther examined the evidence, it became
clear thatdespite surface appearancesthere was indeed a huge differ
ence between the two sets ofcompanies in theirapproach to discipline.
130 Jim Collins
Consider Ray MacDonald, whotookcommand of Burroughsin 1964.
A brilliant but abrasive man, MacDonald controlled the conversations,
told all the jokes, and criticized those not as smart as he (which was
pretty much everyone around him). He got things done through sheer
force of personality, using a form of pressure that came to be known as
"The MacDonald Vise."22 MacDonald produced remarkable results
during his reign. Every dollarinvested in 1964, the yearhe became pres
ident, and taken out at the end of 1977, when he retired, produced
returns 6.6 times better than the general market.23 However, the com
pany had no culture of discipline to endure beyond him. After he
retired, his helper minions were frozen by indecision, leavingthe com
pany, according to Business Week, "with an inability to do anything."24
Burroughs then began a long slide, with cumulative returns falling 93
percent belowthe marketfrom the end of the MacDonald era to 2000.
We found a similar story at Rubbermaid under Stanley Gault. Recall
Burroughs Corporation, a classic Unsustained Transition
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market,
Set to 1.0 at Start of Ray MacDonald Reign
Ray MacDonald Era
Post-Ray MacDonald
1951 1976 2000
Good to Great 131
from the Level 5 chapterthat Gault quippedin response to the accusation
of being a tyrant, "Yes, but I'm a sincere tyrant." Gault brought strict dis
ciplines to Rubbermaidrigorous planning and competitor analysis, sys
tematic market research, profit analysis, hard-nosed cost control, and so
on. "This is an incredibly disciplined organization," wrote one analyst.
"Thereis an incredible thoroughness in Rubbermaid's approach to life."25
Precise and methodical, Gault arrived at work by 6:30 and routinely
worked eighty-hour weeks, expecting his managers to do the same.26
As chiefdisciplinarian, Gaultpersonally acted as the company's number
one quality control mechanism. Walking down the street in Manhattan, he
noticed a doorman muttering and swearing as he swept dirt into a Rubber
maid dustpan. "Stan whirled around and starting grilling the man on why
he was unhappy," said Richard Gates, who told the story to Fortune. Gault,
convinced that the lip ofthe dustpan was too thick, promptly issued a dic
tate to his engineers to redesign the product. "On quality, I'm a sonofabitch,"
said Gault. His chiefoperating officer concurred: "Hegets livid."27
Rubbermaid rose dramatically under the tyranny of this singularly dis
ciplined leader but then just as dramatically declined when he departed.
Under Gault, Rubbermaid beat the market 3.6 to 1. After Gault, Rubber
maid lost 59 percent of its value relative to the market, before being
bought out by Newell.
One particularly fascinating example of the disciplinarian syndrome
was Chrysler under Lee Iacocca, whom Business Week described simply
as, "The Man. The Dictator. Lee."28 Iacocca became president of
Chrysler in 1979 and imposed his towering personality to discipline the
organization into shape. "Right away I knew the place was in a state of
anarchy [and] needed a dose of order and disciplineand quick," wrote
Iacocca of his early days.29 In his first year, he entirely overhauled the
management structure, instituted strict financial controls, improved qual
ity control measures, rationalized the production schedule, and con
ducted mass layoffs to preserve cash.30 "I felt like an Army Surgeon. . . .
We hadtodoradical surgery, saving what we could."31 In dealing with the
unions, he said, "Ifyou don't helpmeout, I'm going to blow your brains
out. I'll declare bankruptcy in the morning, and you'll all be out of
work."32 Iacocca produced spectacular results and Chrysler became one
ofthe most celebrated turnarounds in industrial history.
About midway through his tenure, however, Iacocca seemed to lose
focus and the company began to decline once again. The Wall Street Jour
nal wrote: "Mr. Iacocca headed the Statue of Liberty renovation, joined a
132 Jim Collins
Rubbermaid Corporation, a Classic Unsustained Transition
Ratio of Cumulative Stock Returns to General Market,
Set to 1.0 at Start of Stanley Gault Reign
Disciplinarian
Ends Reign
Company
Acquired
1960 1980 2000
congressional commission on budget reduction and wrote a secondbook.
He began a syndicated newspaper column, bought an Italian villa where
he started bottling hisownwine and olive oil.... Critics contend it all dis
tracted him, and was a root cause of Chrysler's current problems.... Dis
tracting or not, it's clear thatbeing a folk hero is a demanding sideline."33
Worse than his moonlight career as a national hero, his lack of disci
pline to stay within the arenas in whichChrysler could be the best in the
world led to a binge of highly undisciplined diversifications. In 1985, he
was lured into the sexy aerospace business. Whereas mostCEOs wouldbe
content with a single Gulfstream jet, Iacocca decided to buy the whole
Gulfstream company!34 Also in the mid-1980s, he embarked on a costly
and ultimately unsuccessful joint venture with Italian sports car maker
Maserati. "Iacocca had a soft spot for Italians," said one retired Chrysler
executive. "Iacocca, who owns a modest estate in Tuscany, was so intent
on an Italian alliance that commercial realities were ignored, suggest
industry insiders," wrote Business Week.35 Some estimates put the loss of
the failed Maserati venture at $200 million, which, according to Forbes,
was "an enormous sum to lose on a high-price, low-volume roadster. After
all, no more than a few thousand will everbe built."36
Duringthe first halfofhistenure, Iacocca produced remarkable results,
taking the company from near bankruptcy to nearly three times the gen
eral market. During the secondhalfof Iacocca's tenure, the companyslid
Good to Great 133
31 percent behind the market and faced another potential bankruptcy.37
"Like so many patients with a heart condition," wrote a Chrysler execu
tive, "we'd survived surgery several years before only to revert to our
unhealthylifestyle."38
The above cases illustrate a pattern we found in every unsustained com
parison: a spectacular rise under a tyrannical disciplinarian, followed by
an equally spectacular decline when the disciplinarian stepped away,
leaving behind noenduring culture ofdiscipline, orwhen thedisciplinar
ian himself became undisciplined andstrayed wantonly outside the three
circles. Yes, discipline is essential for great results, but disciplined action
without disciplined understanding of the three circles cannot produce
sustained great results.
FANATICAL ADHERENCE TO
THE HEDGEHOG CONCEPT
For nearly forty years, Pitney Bowes lived inside the warm and protective
cocoon of a monopoly. With its close relationship to the U.S. Postal Ser
vice and its patents on postage meter machines, Pitney attained 100 per
centofthe metered mail market.39 By the end ofthe 1950s, nearly halfof
all U.S. mail passed through Pitney Bowes machines.40 With gross profit
margins in excess of 80 percent, no competition, a huge market, and a
recession-proof business, Pitney Bowes wasn't so much a great company as
it was a company with a great monopoly.
Then, as almost always happens to monopolies when the protective
cocoon is ripped away, Pitney Bowes began a long slide. First came a con
sent decree that required Pitney Bowes to license its patents tocompetitors,
royalty free.41 Within six years, Pitney Bowes had sixteen competitors.42 Pit
ney fell into a reactionary "Chicken Little/the sky is falling" diversification
frenzy, throwing cash after ill-fated acquisitions and joint ventures,
including a $70 million bloodbath (54 percent ofnet stockholders' equity
at the time) from a computer retail foray. In 1973, the company lost
money for the first time in its history. It was shaping up to be just another
typical case of a monopoly-protected company gradually falling apart
onceconfronted with the harsh reality ofcompetition.
Fortunately, a Level 5 leader named Fred Allen stepped in and asked
hard questions that led to deeper understanding of Pitney's role in the
world. Instead of viewing itself as a "postage meter" company, Pitney
134 Jim Collins
came to see that it could be the best in the world at servicing the back
rooms of businesses within the broader concept of "messaging." It also
came to see that sophisticated back-office products, like high-end faxes
andspecialized copiers, played right into its economic engine ofprofit per
customer, building offits extensive sales andservice network.
Allen andhis successor, George Harvey, instituted a model ofdisciplined
diversification. For example, Pitney eventually attained 45 percent of the
high-end fax market for large companies, ahugely profitable cash machine.43
Harvey began a systematic process of investment in new technologies and
products, such as the Paragon mail processor that seals and sends letters, and
by the late 1980s, Pitney consistently derived over half its revenues from
products introduced in the previous three years.44 Later, Pitney Bowes
became a pioneer at linking backroom machines to the Internet, yet
another opportunity for disciplined diversification. The key point is that
every step ofdiversification and innovation stayed within the three circles.
After falling 77percent behind the market from the consent decree to
its darkest days in 1973, Pitney Bowes reversed course, eventually rising to
over eleven timesthe market bythe start of 1999. From 1973 to 2000, Pit
ney Bowes outperformed Coca-Cola, 3M, Johnson & Johnson, Merck,
Motorola, Procter & Gamble, Hewlett-Packard, Walt Disney, and even
General Electric. Can you think ofany othercompany that emerged from
the protective comfort of a monopoly cocoon to deliver this level of
results? AT&T didn't. Xerox didn't. Even IBM didn't.
Pitney Bowes illustrates what can happen when a company lacks the
discipline to stay within the three circles and, conversely, what can hap
pen whenit regains that discipline.
In contrast, wefound a lackofdiscipline to stay withinthe three circles
as a key factor in the demise of nearly all the comparison companies.
Every comparison either (1) lacked the discipline to understand its three
circles or (2) lacked the discipline to stay within the three circles.
Good to Great 135
R.J. Reynolds is a classic case. Until the 1960s, R.J. Reynolds had a
simple and clear concept, built around being the best tobacco company
in the UnitedStatesa position it had held for at least twenty-five years.45
Then in 1964, the Surgeon General's Office issued its report that linked
cigarettes with cancer, and R. J. Reynolds began to diversify away from
tobacco as a defensive measure. Ofcourse, all tobacco companies began
to diversify at that time for the same reason, including Philip Morris. But
R. J. Reynolds' wanderings outside its three circles defied all logic.
R. J. Reynolds spent nearly a third of total corporate assets in 1970 to
buy a shipping container company and an oil company (Sea-Land and
Aminoil), the idea being to make money by shipping its own oil.46 Okay,
not a terrible ideaon its own. Butwhat on earthdid it have to do with R. J.
Reynolds' Hedgehog Concept? It was a wholly undisciplined acquisition
that came about in part because Sea-Land's founder was a close friend of
R. J. Reynolds' chairman.47
After pouring more than $2 billion into Sea-Land, the total investment
nearly equaled the entire amount of net stockholders' equity.48 Finally,
after years of starving the tobacco business to funnel funds into the sink
ing ship business, RJR acknowledged failure and sold Sea-Land.49 One
Reynolds grandson complained: "Look, these guys are the world's best at
making and selling tobacco products, butwhat do they know about ships
oroil? I'm notworried about them going broke, butthey look like country
boys with toomuch cash in their pockets."50
To be fair, Philip Morris did not have a perfect diversification record
either, as evidenced byits failed purchase of7UP. However, in stark con
trast to R.J. Reynolds, Philip Morris displayed greater discipline in
response to the 1964 surgeon general's report. Instead of abandoning its
Hedgehog Concept, Philip Morris redefined its Hedgehog Concept in
terms of building global brands in not-so-healthy consumables (tobacco,
beer, soft drinks, coffee, chocolate, processed cheese, etc.). Philip Morris'
superior discipline to stay within the three circles is one key reason why
the results of the two companies diverged so dramatically after the 1964
report, despite thefact that they both faced theexact same industry oppor
tunities andthreats. From 1964 to 1989 (when R. J. Reynolds disappeared
from public trading in a leveraged buyout), $1 invested in Philip Morris
beat$1 invested in R. J. Reynolds by over four times.
Few companies have the discipline to discover their Hedgehog Con
cept, much less the discipline to build consistently within it. Theyfail to
grasp a simple paradox: The more an organization has the discipline to
136 Jim Collins
stay within its three circles, the more it will have attractive opportuni
ties for growth. Indeed, a great company is much more likely to die of
indigestion from too much opportunity than starvation from too little.
The challenge becomes not opportunity creation, but opportunity selec
tion.
This notion of fanatical consistency relative to the Hedgehog Concept
doesn't justconcern the portfolio ofstrategic activities. It can relate to the
entire way you manage andbuild an organization. Nucor built its success
around the Hedgehog Concept of harnessing culture and technology to
produce steel. Central to the Nucor concept was the idea of aligning
worker interests with management and shareholder interests through an
egalitarian meritocracy largely devoid of class distinctions. Wrote Ken
Iverson, in his 1998 book Plain Talk:
Inequality still runs rampant in most business corporations. I'm referring
now to hierarchical inequality which legitimizes and institutionalizes
the principle of"We" vs. "They." ... The people at the topofthe corpo
rate hierarchy grant themselves privilege after privilege, flaunt those
privileges before the menandwomen who dothe real work, then won
der why employees are unmoved by management's invocations to cut
costs and boost profitability When I think ofthe millions of dollars
spent by people at the top of the management hierarchy on efforts to
motivate people who are continually put down by that hierarchy, I can
only shake my headin wonder.51
When weinterviewed KenIverson, he told us that nearly100percent of
the success of Nucor was due to its ability to translate its simple concept
into disciplined action consistent with thatconcept. Itgrew into a $3.5 bil
lion Fortune 500 company with only four layers of management and a
corporate headquarters staff offewer than twenty-five peopleexecutive,
financial, secretarial, the whole shebangcrammed into a rented office
the size of a small dental practice.52 Cheap veneer furniture adorned the
Passion
for eliminating class
distinctions and creating
an egalitarian meritocracy that
aligns management, labor, and
financial interests
Good to Great 137
Couldbecome the p* ^T Economic
best in the world at I / denominator of
harnessing culture \ / profit per ton of
and technology to\ / finished steel
produce low-cost
steel
Nucor's Three Circles
1970-1995
lobby, which itself was not much larger than a closet. Instead of a corpo
rate dining room, executives hosted visiting dignitaries at Phil's Diner, a
stripmall sandwich shop across the street.53
Executivesdid not receive better benefits than frontline workers. In fact,
executives had fewer perks. For example, all workers (but not executives)
were eligible to receive $2,000 peryear for each child for up to four years of
post-high school education.54 In one incident, a man came to Marvin
Pohlman and said, "I have nine kids. Are you telling me that you'll pay for
four years ofschoolcollege, trade school, whateverfor every single one
of my kids?" Pohlman acknowledged that, yes, that's exactly what would
happen. "Themanjust sat there and cried," said Pohlman. "I'll never forget
it. It justcaptures in one momentsomuch ofwhatwewere trying to do."55
When Nucor had a highly profitable year, everyone in the company
would have a very profitable year. Nucor workers became sowell paid that
one woman told her husband, "If you get fired from Nucor, I'll divorce
you."56 Butwhen Nucor faced difficult times, everyone from top to bot
tom suffered. But people at the top suffered more. In the 1982 recession,
for example, worker paywentdown 25 percent, officer paywent down 60
percent, and the CEO's paywentdown 75 percent.57
138 Jim Collins
Nucor tookextraordinary steps to keepat baythe class distinctions that
eventually encroach on most organizations. All 7,000 employees' names
appeared in the annual report, not just officers' and executives'.58 Every
one except safety supervisors and visitors wore the same color hard hats.
The colorofhard hats mightsoundtrivial, but it causedquite a stir. Some
foremen complained that special-colored hard hats identified them as
higher in the chain,an important status symbol thattheycouldput on the
back shelves of their cars or trucks. Nucor responded by organizing a
series of forums to address the point that your status and authority in
Nucor come from your leadership capabilities, not your position. If you
don't like it-if youreally feel you need that class distinctionwell, then,
Nucor is just notthe right place for you.59
In contrast to Nucor's dental suite-sized headquarters, Bethlehem
Steelbuilt a twenty-one-story office complex to house itsexecutive staff. At
extra expense, it designed the building more like a cross than a rectan
glea design that accommodated the large number of vice presidents
who needed corner offices. "The vice presidents... [had to have] win
dows in two directions, so it was out of that desire that we came up with
the design," explained a Bethlehem executive.60 In his book Crisis in
Bethlehem, John Strohmeyer details a culture asfarto the other end ofthe
continuum from Nucor asyoucan imagine. He describes a fleetof corpo
rate aircraft, used even for taking executives' children to college and flit
tingaway toweekend hideaways. Hedescribes a world-class eighteen-hole
executive golf course, an executive country club renovated with Bethle
hem corporate funds, and even how executive rank determined shower
priority at the club.61
We came to the conclusion that Bethlehem executives saw the very
purpose of their activities as the perpetuation of a class system that ele
vated them to elite status. Bethlehem did not decline in the 1970s
and 1980s primarily because of imports or technologyBethlehem
declined first and foremost because it was a culture wherein people
focused their efforts on negotiating the nuances of an intricate social
hierarchy, not on customers, competitors, or changes in the external
world.
From 1966 (at the startof itsbuildup) to 1999, Nucor posted thirty-four
consecutive years ofpositive profitability, while over those same thirty-four
years, Bethlehem lost money twelve times and its cumulative profitability
added up to less than zero. By the 1990s, Nucor's profitability beat Beth
lehem's every single year, and at the end of the century, Nucorwhich
Good to Great 139
had been less than a third the size of Bethlehem onlya decade earlier
finally surpassed Bethlehem in total revenues.62 Even more astounding,
Nucor's average five-year profit per employee exceeded Bethlehem by
almost ten times.63 And for the investor, $1 invested in Nucor beat $1
invested in Bethlehem Steel byover 200times.
To be fair, Bethlehem had one giant problem not faced by Nucor:
adversarial labor relations and entrenched unions. Nucor had no union
and enjoyed remarkably good relations with its workers. In fact, when
union organizers visited one plant, workers felt so ferociously loyal to
Nucorthatmanagement hadto protect the union organizers from workers
who began shouting and throwing sand at them.64
But the union argument begs a crucial question: Why did Nucor have
sucha better relationship with its workers in the first place? Because Ken
Iverson and his team had a simple, crystalline Hedgehog Concept about
aligning worker interests with management interests andmost impor
tantlybecause they were willing togo toalmost extreme lengths to build
the entire enterprise consistent with that concept. Call them a bit fanati
cal ifyou want, but to create great results requires a nearly fanatical dedi
cation to the ideaof consistency within the Hedgehog Concept.
START A "STOP DOING" LIST
Do you have a "to do" list?
Do youalso have a "stop doing" list?
Most of us lead busy but undisciplined lives. We have ever-expanding
"to do" lists, trying tobuild momentum by doing, doing, doingand doing
more. And it rarely works. Those who built the good-to-great companies,
however, made as much use of"stop doing" lists as "to do" lists. Theydis
played a remarkable discipline to unplug all sorts ofextraneous junk.
When Darwin Smith became CEO of Kimberly-Clark, he made great
use of "stop doing" lists. He saw that playing the annual forecast game
with Wall Street focused people too much on the short term, so he just
stopped doing it. "On balance, I see no net advantage to our stockholders
when we annually forecast future earnings," said Smith. "We will not do
it"65 Hesaw "title creep" as a sign ofclass-consciousness andbureaucratic
layering, so he simply unplugged titles. No one at the company would
havea title, unless it was fora position where the outside world demanded
a title. He saw increasing layers as the natural result of empire building.
140 Jim Collins
So he simply unplugged a huge stack of layers with a simple elegant
mechanism: If you couldn't justify to your peers the need for at least fif
teen people reporting to you to fulfill your responsibilities, then you
would have zero people reporting to you.66 (Keep in mindthathe did this
in the 1970s, long before it became fashionable.) To reinforce the idea
that Kimberly-Clark should begin thinking of itselfas a consutner com
pany, not a papercompany, he unplugged Kimberly from all paper indus
trytrade associations.67
The good-to-great companies institutionalized the discipline of "stop
doing" through the useofa uniquebudget mechanism. Stop and thinkfor
a moment: What is the purpose ofbudgeting? Mostanswer that budgeting
exists to decidehowmuch to apportion to each activity, or to manage costs,
or both. Froma good-to-great perspective, both ofthese answers are wrong.
much^h"a#vj 0^^^^w^^tl^i^^^^Srv^c^'fK^^i^^^r^ *
^t4^or^tbe^Hi9^
: whifMhaufd be elimfnated/erfirply; / \ ;t'vjf,-' /
Kimberly-Clark didn't justreallocate resources from the paper business
to the consumer business. It completely eliminated the paper business,
sold the mills, and invested all the money into the emerging consumer
business.
I had an interesting conversation withsomeexecutives froma company
in the paper business. It's a good company, not yet a great one, and they
had competeddirectly with Kimberly-Clark before Kimberly transformed
itselfinto a consumercompany. Out of curiosity, I asked them what they
thought ofKimberly-Clark. "What Kimberly did isnot fair," theysaid.
"Not fair?" I looked quizzical.
"Oh, sure, they've becomea much moresuccessful company. But,you
know, if we'd sold our paper business and become a powerful consumer
company, we could have been great, too. But we just have too much
invested in it, and we couldn't havebrought ourselves to do it."
If you look back on the good-to-great companies, they displayed
remarkable courage to channel their resources into onlyone or a few areGood
to Great 141
nas. Once they understood their three circles, they rarely hedged their
bets. Recall Kroger's commitment to overturn its entire system to create
superstores, while A&P clung to the "safety" of its older stores. Recall
Abbott's commitment to putthe bulk ofits resources into becoming num
ber one indiagnostics and hospital nutritionals, while Upjohn clung to its
core pharmaceutical business (where it could never be the best in the
world). Recall how Walgreens exited the profitable food-service business
and focused all its might into one idea: the best, most convenient drug
stores. Recall Gillette and Sensor, Nucor and the mini-mills, Kimberly-
Clark and selling the mills to channel all its resources into the consumer
business. They all had the guts to make huge investments, once they
understood their Hedgehog Concept.
The most effective investment strategy is a highly undiversified port
folio when you are right. As facetious as that sounds, that's essentially the
approach the good-to-great companies took. "Being right" means getting
the Hedgehog Concept; "highly undiversified" means investing fully in
those things that fit squarely within the three circles and getting rid of
everything else.
Ofcourse, the key here is the little caveat, "When you are right." But
how do you know when you re right? In studying the companies, we
learned that "being right" just isn't that hard ifyou have all the pieces in
place. Ifyou have Level 5leaders who get the right people on the bus,
if you confront the brutal facts of reality, if you create a climate where
the truth is heard, ifyou have a Council andwork within the three circles,
ifyou frame all decisions in the context ofa crystalline Hedgehog Con
cept, if you act from understanding, not bravadoif you do all these
things, then you are likely to be right on the big decisions. The real ques
tion is, once you know theright thing, do you have the discipline todo the
right thing and, equally important, to stop doing the wrong things?
CULTURE OF DISCIPLINE
KEY .POINTS , .,"..,'. . -,
Sustained great results depend upon building a culture fall ofselfdisciplined
people who take disciplined 'action, fanatically ppn&istent
with the three circles. , ,
Bureaucratic cultures arise to compensate for incompetence and
lack ofdiscipline, which arise from haying the;wrong people onthe
bus inthefirst place. Ifyou get the right people onthebus, and the
wrong people off, you don't need stultifying bureaucracy. .
A culture of discipline involves a duality. On the one hand, it
requires people who adhere toaconsistent system; yet, onthe other
hand, it gives people freedom and responsibility within the frame
workof that system. < \; V?
Aculture of discipline is not just about action. It is aboutgetting
disciplined people who engage indisciplined thought and who then
takedisciplined action.
The good-to-great companies appear boring and pedestrian lopking
infrom the outside, but upon closer inspection, they're Mlofpeo
ple who display extreme diligence and a stunning intensity ffhfy ^
"rinse their cottage cheese"). r x
 Do not confuse a culture of discipline with a tyrant who disfei- :
plinesthey are very different concepts, one highly functional, the }
other highly dysfunctional. Savior CEOs who perspn^Uy discipline
through sheer force ofpersonality usually fail toproduce sustained
results.
The single most important form ofdiscipline for sustained results is
fanatical adherence to the Hedgehog Concept andthe willingness
toshunopportunities thatfall outside thethree circles.
UNEXPECTED FINDINGS
 Themore anorganization has the discipline tostay within its three
circles, with almost religious consistency, the more it will haye
opportunities for growth.
Good to Great 143
The fact that something is a "once-in-a-lifetime opportunity" is
irrelevant, unless it fits within the three circles. Agreat company
will have many once-in-a-lifetime opportunities.
The purpose of budgeting in a good-to-great company is not to
decide how much each activity gets, but to decide which arenas
best fit with theHedgehog Concept and should befully funded and
which should notbefunded at all.
"Stop doing" lists aremore important than"todo" lists.
C H A P T E R
Level 5 FirstWho. .. Confront the Hedgehog Culture of|
Leadership Then What Brutal Facts Concept Discipline f
Mostmen would rather die, than think. Manydo.
Bertrand Russell1
'%*.:' n July 28, 1999, drugstore.comone ofthe first Internet pharma
ciessold shares of its stock to the public. Withinseconds ofthe opening
bell, the stock multiplied nearly threefold to $65 per share. Four weeks
later, the stock closed as high as $69, creating a market valuation of over
$3.5 billion. Notbadfor an enterprise thathadsold products for less than
nine months, had fewer than 500 employees, offered no hope of investor
dividends, for years (ifnotdecades), and deliberately planned to lose hun
dreds ofmillions ofdollars before turning a single dollar ofprofit.2
Whatrationale did people use to justify these rather extraordinary num
bers? "New technology will change everything," the logic went. "The
Internet is going to completely revolutionize all businesses," the gurus
chanted. "It's the great Internet landgrab: Be there first, be there fast,
build market shareno matter how expensiveand you win," yelled the
entrepreneurs.
We entered a remarkable moment in history when the whole idea of
trying to build a great company seemed quaint and outdated. "Built to
Good to Great 145
Flip" became the mantra ofthe day. Just tell people you were doing some
thing, anything, connected to the Internet, andpresto!