GUNS,
GERMS AND
STEEL
THE FATES OF HUMAN SOCIETIES
Jared Diamond
W. W. Norton & Company
New York London
I 6  PROLOGUE
islands, much of the Americas, and small parts of sub-Saharan Africa
lived as farming tribes or even still as hunter-gatherer bands using stone
tools.
Of course, those technological and political differences as of A.D. 1500
were the immediate cause of the modern world's inequalities. Empires with
steel weapons were able to conquer or exterminate tribes with weapons of
stone and wood. How, though, did the world get to be the way it was in
A.D. 1500?
Once again, we can easily push this question back one step further, by
drawing on written histories and archaeological discoveries. Until the end
of the last Ice Age, around 11,000 B.C., all peoples on all continents were
still hunter-gatherers. Different rates of development on different continents,
from 11,000 B.C. to A.D. 1500, were what led to the technological
and political inequalities of A.D. 1500. While Aboriginal Australians and
many Native Americans remained hunter-gatherers, most of Eurasia and
much of the Americas and sub-Saharan Africa gradually developed agriculture,
herding, metallurgy, and complex political organization. Parts of
Eurasia, and one area of the Americas, independently developed writing
as well. However, each of these new developments appeared earlier in
Eurasia than elsewhere. For instance, the mass production of bronze tools,
which was just beginning in the South American Andes in the centuries
before A.D. 1500, was already established in parts of Eurasia over 4,000
years earlier. The stone technology of the Tasmanians, when first encountered
by European explorers in A.D. 1642, was simpler than that prevalent
in parts of Upper Paleolithic Europe tens of thousands of years earlier.
Thus, we can finally rephrase the question about the modern world's
inequalities as follows: why did human development proceed at such different
rates on different continents? Those disparate rates constitute history's
broadest pattern and my book's subject.
While this book is thus ultimately about history and prehistory, its subject
is not of just academic interest but also of overwhelming practical and
political importance. The history of interactions among disparate peoples
is what shaped the modern world through conquest, epidemics, and genocide.
Those collisions created reverberations that have still not died down
after many centuries, and that are actively continuing in some of the
world's most troubled areas today.
For example, much of Africa is still struggling with its legacies from
recent colonialism. In other regionsincluding much of Central America,
YALI'S QUESTION  I 7
Mexico, Peru, New Caledonia, the former Soviet Union, and parts of Indonesia
civil unrest or guerrilla warfare pits still-numerous indigenous populations
against governments dominated by descendants of invading
conquerors. Many other indigenous populationssuch as native Hawai
ians, Aboriginal Australians, native Siberians, and Indians in the United
States, Canada, Brazil, Argentina, and Chilebecame so reduced in numbers
by genocide and disease that they are now greatly outnumbered by
the descendants of invaders. Although thus incapable of mounting a civil
war, they are nevertheless increasingly asserting their rights.
In addition to these current political and economic reverberations of
past collisions among peoples, there are current linguistic reverberations
especially the impending disappearance of most of the modern world's
6,000 surviving languages, becoming replaced by English, Chinese, Russian,
and a few other languages whose numbers of speakers have increased
enormously in recent centuries. All these problems of the modern world
result from the different historical trajectories implicit in Yali's question.
BEFORE SEEKING ANSWERS to Yali's question, we should pause to
consider some objections to discussing it at all. Some people take offense
at the mere posing of the question, for several reasons.
One objection goes as follows. If we succeed in explaining how some
people came to dominate other people, may this not seem to justify the
domination? Doesn't it seem to say that the outcome was inevitable, and
that it would therefore be futile to try to change the outcome today? This
objection rests on a common tendency to confuse an explanation of causes
with a justification or acceptance of results. What use one makes of a historical
explanation is a question separate from the explanation itself.
Understanding is more often used to try to alter an outcome than to repeat
or perpetuate it. That's why psychologists try to understand the minds of
murderers and rapists, why social historians try to understand genocide,
and why physicians try to understand the causes of human disease. Those
investigators do not seek to justify murder, rape, genocide, and illness.
instead, they seek to use their understanding of a chain of causes to interrupt
the chain.
Second, doesn't addressing Yali's question automatically involve a
Eurocentric approach to history, a glorification of western Europeans, and
an obsession with the prominence of western Europe and Europeanized

C H A P T E R 3
COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA
THE BIGGEST POPULATION SHIFT OF MODERN TIMES HAS
been the colonization of the New World by Europeans, and the
resulting conquest, numerical reduction, or complete disappearance of
most groups of Native Americans (American Indians). As I explained in
Chapter 1, the New World was initially colonized around or before 11,000
B.c. by way of Alaska, the Bering Strait, and Siberia. Complex agricultural
societies gradually arose in the Americas far to the south of that entry
route, developing in complete isolation from the emerging complex societies
of the Old World. After that initial colonization from Asia, the sole
well-attested further contacts between the New World and Asia involved
only hunter-gatherers living on opposite sides of the Bering Strait, plus an
inferred transpacific voyage that introduced the sweet potato from South
America to Polynesia.
As for contacts of New World peoples with Europe, the sole early ones
involved the Norse who occupied Greenland in very small numbers
between A.D. 986 and about 1500. But those Norse visits had no discernible
impact on Native American societies. Instead, for practical purposes
the collision of advanced Old World and New World societies began
abruptly in A.D. 1492, with Christopher Columbus's "discovery" of Caribbean
islands densely populated by Native Americans.
The most dramatic moment in subsequent European-Native American
6 8  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
relations was the first encounter between the Inca emperor Atahuallpa and
the Spanish conquistador Francisco Pizarro at the Peruvian highland town
of Cajamarca on November 16, 1532. Atahuallpa was absolute monarch
of the largest and most advanced state in the New World, while Pizarro
represented the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V (also known as King
Charles I of Spain), monarch of the most powerful state in Europe.
Pizarro, leading a ragtag group of 168 Spanish soldiers, was in unfamiliar
terrain, ignorant of the local inhabitants, completely out of touch with the
nearest Spaniards (1,000 miles to the north in Panama) and far beyond the
reach of timely reinforcements. Atahuallpa was in the middle of his own
empire of millions of subjects and immediately surrounded by his army of
80,000 soldiers, recently victorious in a war with other Indians. Nevertheless,
Pizarro captured Atahuallpa within a few minutes after the two leaders
first set eyes on each other. Pizarro proceeded to hold his prisoner
for eight months, while extracting history's largest ransom in return for a
promise to free him. After the ransomenough gold to fill a room 22 feet
long by 17 feet wide to a height of over 8 feetwas delivered, Pizarro
reneged on his promise and executed Atahuallpa.
Atahuallpa's capture was decisive for the European conquest of the Inca
Empire. Although the Spaniards' superior weapons would have assured an
ultimate Spanish victory in any case, the capture made the conquest
quicker and infinitely easier. Atahuallpa was revered by the Incas as a sungod
and exercised absolute authority over his subjects, who obeyed even
the orders he issued from captivity. The months until his death gave
Pizarro time to dispatch exploring parties unmolested to other parts of the
Inca Empire, and to send for reinforcements from Panama. When fighting
between Spaniards and Incas finally did commence after Atahuallpa's execution,
the Spanish forces were more formidable.
Thus, Atahuallpa's capture interests us specifically as marking the decisive
moment in the greatest collision of modern history. But it is also of
more general interest, because the factors that resulted in Pizarro's seizing
Atahuallpa were essentially the same ones that determined the outcome of
many similar collisions between colonizers and native peoples elsewhere
in the modern world. Hence Atahuallpa's capture offers us a broad window
onto world history.
WHAT UNFOLDED THAT day at Cajamarca is well known, because it
was recorded in writing by many of the Spanish participants. To get a
COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA  69
flavor of those events, let us relive them by weaving together excerpts from
eyewitness accounts by six of Pizarro's companions, including his brothers
Hernando and Pedro:
"The prudence, fortitude, military discipline, labors, perilous navigations,
and battles of the Spaniardsvassals of the most invincible Emperor
of the Roman Catholic Empire, our natural King and Lordwill cause joy
to the faithful and terror to the infidels. For this reason, and for the glory
of God our Lord and for the service of the Catholic Imperial Majesty, it
has seemed good to me to write this narrative, and to send it to Your
Majesty, that all may have a knowledge of what is here related. It will be
to the glory of God, because they have conquered and brought to our holy
Catholic Faith so vast a number of heathens, aided by His holy guidance.
It will be to the honor of our Emperor because, by reason of his great
power and good fortune, such events happened in his time. It will give joy
to the faithful that such battles have been won, such provinces discovered
and conquered, such riches brought home for the King and for themselves;
and that such terror has been spread among the infidels, such admiration
excited in all mankind.
"For when, either in ancient or modern times, have such great exploits
been achieved by so few against so many, over so many climes, across so
many seas, over such distances by land, to subdue the unseen and
unknown? Whose deeds can be compared with those of Spain? Our Spaniards,
being few in number, never having more than 200 or 300 men
together, and sometimes only 100 and even fewer, have, in our times, conquered
more territory than has ever been known before, or than all the
faithful and infidel princes possess. I will only write, at present, of what
befell in the conquest, and I will not write much, in order to avoid prolixity.
"Governor Pizarro wished to obtain intelligence from some Indians
who had come from Cajamarca, so he had them tortured. They confessed
that they had heard that Atahuallpa was waiting for the Governor at Cajamarca.
The Governor then ordered us to advance. On reaching the
entrance to Cajamarca, we saw the camp of Atahuallpa at a distance of a
league, in the skirts of the mountains. The Indians' camp looked like a
very beautiful city. They had so many tents that we were all filled with
great apprehension. Until then, we had never seen anything like this in the
Indies. It filled all our Spaniards with fear and confusion. But we could
not show any fear or turn back, for if the Indians had sensed any weakness
in us, even the Indians that we were bringing with us as guides would have
70 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
killed us. So we made a show of good spirits, and after carefully observing
the town and the tents, we descended into the valley and entered Caja
marca.
"We talked a lot among ourselves about what to do. All of us were full
of fear, because we were so few in number and we had penetrated so far
into a land where we could not hope to receive reinforcements. We all met
with the Governor to debate what we should undertake the next day. Few
of us slept that night, and we kept watch in the square of Cajamarca,
looking at the campfires of the Indian army. It was a frightening sight.
Most of the campfires were on a hillside and so close to each other that it
looked like the sky brightly studded with stars. There was no distinction
that night between the mighty and the lowly, or between foot soldiers and
horsemen. Everyone carried out sentry duty fully armed. So too did the
good old Governor, who went about encouraging his men. The Governor's
brother Hernando Pizarro estimated the number of Indian soldiers there
at 40,000, but he was telling a lie just to encourage us, for there were
actually more than 80,000 Indians.
"On the next morning a messenger from Atahuallpa arrived, and the
Governor said to him, 'Tell your lord to come when and how he pleases,
and that, in what way soever he may come I will receive him as a friend
and brother. I pray that he may come quickly, for I desire to see him. No
harm or insult will befall him.'
"The Governor concealed his troops around the square at Cajamarca,
dividing the cavalry into two portions of which he gave the command of
one to his brother Hernando Pizarro and the command of the other to
Hernando de Soto. In like manner he divided the infantry, he himself taking
one part and giving the other to his brother Juan Pizarro. At the same
time, he ordered Pedro de Candia with two or three infantrymen to go
with trumpets to a small fort in the plaza and to station themselves there
with a small piece of artillery. When all the Indians, and Atahuallpa with
them, had entered the Plaza, the Governor would give a signal to Candia
and his men, after which they should start firing the gun, and the trumpets
should sound, and at the sound of the trumpets the cavalry should dash
out of the large court where they were waiting hidden in readiness.
"At noon Atahuallpa began to draw up his men and to approach. Soon
we saw the entire plain full of Indians, halting periodically to wait for
more Indians who kept filing out of the camp behind them. They kept
filling out in separate detachments into the afternoon. The front detachCOLLISION
AT CAJAMARCA  71
ments were now close to our camp, and still more troops kept issuing from
the camp of the Indians. In front of Atahuallpa went 2,000 Indians who
swept the road ahead of him, and these were followed by the warriors,
half of whom were marching in the fields on one side of him and half on
the other side.
"First came a squadron of Indians dressed in clothes of different colors,
like a chessboard. They advanced, removing the straws from the ground
and sweeping the road. Next came three squadrons in different dresses,
dancing and singing. Then came a number of men with armor, large metal
plates, and crowns of gold and silver. So great was the amount of furniture
of gold and silver which they bore, that it was a marvel to observe how
the sun glinted upon it. Among them came the figure of Atahuallpa in a
very fine litter with the ends of its timbers covered in silver. Eighty lords
carried him on their shoulders, all wearing a very rich blue livery. Atahuallpa
himself was very richly dressed, with his crown on his head and a
collar of large emeralds around his neck. He sat on a small stool with a
rich saddle cushion resting on his litter. The litter was lined with parrot
feathers of many colors and decorated with plates of gold and silver.
"Behind Atahuallpa came two other litters and two hammocks, in
which were some high chiefs, then several squadrons of Indians with
crowns of gold and silver. These Indian squadrons began to enter the plaza
to the accompaniment of great songs, and thus entering they occupied
every part of the plaza. In the meantime all of us Spaniards were waiting
ready, hidden in a courtyard, full of fear. Many of us urinated without
noticing it, out of sheer terror. On reaching the center of the plaza, Atahuallpa
remained in his litter on high, while his troops continued to file in
behind him.
"Governor Pizarro now sent Friar Vicente de Valverde to go speak to
Atahuallpa, and to require Atahuallpa in the name of God and of the King
of Spain that Atahuallpa subject himself to the law of our Lord Jesus
Christ and to the service of His Majesty the King of Spain. Advancing with
a cross in one hand and the Bible in the other hand, and going among the
Indian troops up to the place where Atahuallpa was, the Friar thus
addressed him: 'I am a Priest of God, and I teach Christians the things of
God, and in like manner I come to teach you. What I teach is that which
God says to us in this Book. Therefore, on the part of God and of the
Christians, I beseech you to be their friend, for such is God's will, and it
will be for your good.'
72  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
"Atahuallpa asked for the Book, that he might look at it, and the Friar
gave it to him closed. Atahuallpa did not know how to open the Book,
and the Friar was extending his arm to do so, when Atahuallpa, in great
anger, gave him a blow on the arm, not wishing that it should be opened.
Then he opened it himself, and, without any astonishment at the letters
and paper he threw it away from him five or six paces, his face a deep
crimson.
"The Friar returned to Pizarro, shouting, 'Come out! Come out, Christians!
Come at these enemy dogs who reject the things of God. That tyrant
has thrown my book of holy law to the ground! Did you not see what
happened? Why remain polite and servile toward this over-proud dog
when the plains are full of Indians? March out against him, for I absolve
you!'
"The governor then gave the signal to Candia, who began to fire off the
guns. At the same time the trumpets were sounded, and the armored Spanish
troops, both cavalry and infantry, sallied forth out of their hiding
places straight into the mass of unarmed Indians crowding the square,
giving the Spanish battle cry, 'Santiago!' We had placed rattles on the
horses to terrify the Indians. The booming of the guns, the blowing of the
trumpets, and the rattles on the horses threw the Indians into panicked
confusion. The Spaniards fell upon them and began to cut them to pieces.
The Indians were so filled with fear that they climbed on top of one
another, formed mounds, and suffocated each other. Since they were
unarmed, they were attacked without danger to any Christian. The cavalry
rode them down, killing and wounding, and following in pursuit. The
infantry made so good an assault on those that remained that in a short
time most of them were put to the sword.
"The Governor himself took his sword and dagger, entered the thick of
the Indians with the Spaniards who were with him, and with great bravery
reached Atahuallpa's litter. He fearlessly grabbed Atahuallpa's left arm
and shouted 'Santiago!,' but he could not pull Atahuallpa out of his litter
because it was held up high. Although we killed the Indians who held the
litter, others at once took their places and held it aloft, and in this manner
we spent a long time in overcoming and killing Indians. Finally seven or
eight Spaniards on horseback spurred on their horses, rushed upon the
litter from one side, and with great effort they heaved it over on its side.
In that way Atahuallpa was captured, and the Governor took Atahuallpa
COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA  73
to his lodging. The Indians carrying the litter, and those escorting Ata
huallpa, never abandoned him: all died around him.
"The panic-stricken Indians remaining in the square, terrified at the firing
of the guns and at the horsessomething they had never seentried
to flee from the square by knocking down a stretch of wall and running
out onto the plain outside. Our cavalry jumped the broken wall and
charged into the plain, shouting, 'Chase those with the fancy clothes!
Don't let any escape! Spear them!' All of the other Indian soldiers whom
Atahuallpa had brought were a mile from Cajamarca ready for battle, but
not one made a move, and during all this not one Indian raised a weapon
against a Spaniard. When the squadrons of Indians who had remained in
the plain outside the town saw the other Indians fleeing and shouting, most
of them too panicked and fled. It was an astonishing sight, for the whole
valley for 15 or 20 miles was completely filled with Indians. Night had
already fallen, and our cavalry were continuing to spear Indians in the
fields, when we heard a trumpet calling for us to reassemble at camp.
"If night had not come on, few out of the more than 40,000 Indian
troops would have been left alive. Six or seven thousand Indians lay dead,
and many more had their arms cut off and other wounds. Atahuallpa himself
admitted that we had killed 7,000 of his men in that battle. The man
killed in one of the litters was his minister, the lord of Chincha, of whom
he was very fond. All those Indians who bore Atahuallpa's litter appeared
to be high chiefs and councillors. They were all killed, as well as those
Indians who were carried in the other litters and hammocks. The lord of
Cajamarca was also killed, and others, but their numbers were so great
that they could not be counted, for all who came in attendance on Atahuallpa
were great lords. It was extraordinary to see so powerful a ruler
captured in so short a time, when he had come with such a mighty army.
Truly, it was not accomplished by our own forces, for there were so few
of us. It was by the grace of God, which is great.
"Atahuallpa's robes had been torn off when the Spaniards pulled him
out of his litter. The Governor ordered clothes to be brought to him, and
when Atahuallpa was dressed, the Governor ordered Atahuallpa to sit
near him and soothed his rage and agitation at finding himself so quickly
fallen from his high estate. The Governor said to Atahuallpa, 'Do not take
it as an insult that you have been defeated and taken prisoner, for with the
Christians who come with me, though so few in number, I have conquered
74 ' GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
greater kingdoms than yours, and have defeated other more powerful
lords than you, imposing upon them the dominion of the Emperor, whose
vassal I am, and who is King of Spain and of the universal world. We come
to conquer this land by his command, that all may come to a knowledge
of God and of His Holy Catholic Faith; and by reason of our good mission,
God, the Creator of heaven and earth and of all things in them, permits
this, in order that you may know Him and come out from the bestial
and diabolical life that you lead. It is for this reason that we, being so few
in number, subjugate that vast host. When you have seen the errors in
which you live, you will understand the good that we have done you by
coming to your land by order of his Majesty the King of Spain. Our Lord
permitted that your pride should be brought low and that no Indian
should be able to offend a Christian.' "
LET US NOW trace the chain of causation in this extraordinary confrontation,
beginning with the immediate events. When Pizarro and Atahuallpa
met at Cajamarca, why did Pizarro capture Atahuallpa and kill so many
of his followers, instead of Atahuallpa's vastly more numerous forces capturing
and killing Pizarro? After all, Pizarro had only 62 soldiers mounted
on horses, along with 106 foot soldiers, while Atahuallpa commanded an
army of about 80,000. As for the antecedents of those events, how did
Atahuallpa come to be at Cajamarca at all? How did Pizarro come to be
there to capture him, instead of Atahuallpa's coming to Spain to capture
King Charles I? Why did Atahuallpa walk into what seems to us, with the
gift of hindsight, to have been such a transparent trap? Did the factors
acting in the encounter of Atahuallpa and Pizarro also play a broader role
in encounters between Old World and New World peoples and between
other peoples?
Why did Pizarro capture Atahuallpa? Pizarro's military advantages lay
in the Spaniards' steel swords and other weapons, steel armor, guns, and
horses. To those weapons, Atahuallpa's troops, without animals on which
to ride into battle, could oppose only stone, bronze, or wooden clubs,
maces, and hand axes, plus slingshots and quilted armor. Such imbalances
of equipment were decisive in innumerable other confrontations of Europeans
with Native Americans and other peoples.
The sole Native Americans able to resist European conquest for many
COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA  75
centuries were those tribes that reduced the military disparity by acquiring
and mastering both horses and guns. To the average white American, the
word "Indian" conjures up an image of a mounted Plains Indian brandishing
a rifle, like the Sioux warriors who annihilated General George
Custer's U.S. Army battalion at the famous battle of the Little Big Horn in
1876. We easily forget that horses and rifles were originally unknown to
Native Americans. They were brought by Europeans and proceeded to
transform the societies of Indian tribes that acquired them. Thanks to their
mastery of horses and rifles, the Plains Indians of North America, the
Araucanian Indians of southern Chile, and the Pampas Indians of Argentina
fought off invading whites longer than did any other Native Americans,
succumbing only to massive army operations by white governments
in the 1870s and 1880s.
Today, it is hard for us to grasp the enormous numerical odds against
which the Spaniards' military equipment prevailed. At the battle of Caja
marca recounted above, 168 Spaniards crushed a Native American army
500 times more numerous, killing thousands of natives while not losing a
single Spaniard. Time and again, accounts of Pizarro's subsequent battles
with the Incas, Cortes's conquest of the Aztecs, and other early European
campaigns against Native Americans describe encounters in which a few
dozen European horsemen routed thousands of Indians with great slaughter.
During Pizarro's march from Cajamarca to the Inca capital of Cuzco
after Atahuallpa's death, there were four such battles: at Jauja, Vilcashua
man, Vilcaconga, and Cuzco. Those four battles involved a mere 80, 30,
110, and 40 Spanish horsemen, respectively, in each case ranged against
thousands or tens of thousands of Indians.
These Spanish victories cannot be written off as due merely to the help
of Native American allies, to the psychological novelty of Spanish weapons
and horses, or (as is often claimed) to the Incas' mistaking Spaniards
for their returning god Viracocha. The initial successes of both Pizarro and
Cortes did attract native allies. However, many of them would not have
become allies if they had not already been persuaded, by earlier devastating
successes of unassisted Spaniards, that resistance was futile and that
they should side with the likely winners. The novelty of horses, steel weapons,
and guns undoubtedly paralyzed the Incas at Cajamarca, but the battles
after Cajamarca were fought against determined resistance by Inca
armies that had already seen Spanish weapons and horses. Within half a
7 6  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
dozen years of the initial conquest, Incas mounted two desperate, largescale,
well-prepared rebellions against the Spaniards. All those efforts
failed because of the Spaniards' far superior armament.
By the 1700s, guns had replaced swords as the main weapon favoring
European invaders over Native Americans and other native peoples. For
example, in 1808 a British sailor named Charlie Savage equipped with
muskets and excellent aim arrived in the Fiji Islands. The aptly named
Savage proceeded single-handedly to upset Fiji's balance of power. Among
his many exploits, he paddled his canoe up a river to the Fijian village of
Kasavu, halted less than a pistol shot's length from the village fence, and
fired away at the undefended inhabitants. His victims were so numerous
that surviving villagers piled up the bodies to take shelter behind them,
and the stream beside the village was red with blood. Such examples of
the power of guns against native peoples lacking guns could be multiplied
indefinitely.
In the Spanish conquest of the Incas, guns played only a minor role.
The guns of those times (so-called harquebuses) were difficult to load and
fire, and Pizarro had only a dozen of them. They did produce a big psychological
effect on those occasions when they managed to fire. Far more
important were the Spaniards' steel swords, lances, and daggers, strong
sharp weapons that slaughtered thinly armored Indians. In contrast,
Indian blunt clubs, while capable of battering and wounding Spaniards
and their horses, rarely succeeded in killing them. The Spaniards' steel or
chain mail armor and, above all, their steel helmets usually provided an
effective defense against club blows, while the Indians' quilted armor
offered no protection against steel weapons.
The tremendous advantage that the Spaniards gained from their horses
leaps out of the eyewitness accounts. Horsemen could easily outride Indian
sentries before the sentries had time to warn Indian troops behind them,
and could ride down and kill Indians on foot. The shock of a horse's
charge, its maneuverability, the speed of attack that it permitted, and the
raised and protected fighting platform that it provided left foot soldiers
nearly helpless in the open. Nor was the effect of horses due only to the
terror that they inspired in soldiers fighting against them for the first time.
By the time of the great Inca rebellion of 1536, the Incas had learned how
best to defend themselves against cavalry, by ambushing and annihilating
Spanish horsemen in narrow passes. But the Incas, like all other foot soldiers,
were never able to defeat cavalry in the open. When Quizo YupanCOLLISION
AT CAJAMARCA  77
qui, the best general of the Inca emperor Manco, who succeeded
Atahuallpa, besieged the Spaniards in Lima in 1536 and tried to storm the
city, two squadrons of Spanish cavalry charged a much larger Indian force
on flat ground, killed Quizo and all of his commanders in the first charge,
and routed his army. A similar cavalry charge of 26 horsemen routed the
best troops of Emperor Manco himself, as he was besieging the Spaniards
in Cuzco.
The transformation of warfare by horses began with their domestication
around 4000 B.C., in the steppes north of the Black Sea. Horses permitted
people possessing them to cover far greater distances than was
possible on foot, to attack by surprise, and to flee before a superior
defending force could be gathered. Their role at Cajamarca thus exemplifies
a military weapon that remained potent for 6,000 years, until the early
20th century, and that was eventually applied on all the continents. Not
until the First World War did the military dominance of cavalry finally
end. When we consider the advantages that Spaniards derived from horses,
steel weapons, and armor against foot soldiers without metal, it should no
longer surprise us that Spaniards consistently won battles against enormous
odds.
How did Atahuallpa come to be at Cajamarca? Atahuallpa and his
army came to be at Cajamarca because they had just won decisive battles
in a civil war that left the Incas divided and vulnerable. Pizarro quickly
appreciated those divisions and exploited them. The reason for the civil
war was that an epidemic of smallpox, spreading overland among South
American Indians after its arrival with Spanish settlers in Panama and
Colombia, had killed the Inca emperor Huayna Capac and most of his
court around 1526, and then immediately killed his designated heir, Ninan
Cuyuchi. Those deaths precipitated a contest for the throne between Atahuallpa
and his half brother Huascar. If it had not been for the epidemic,
the Spaniards would have faced a united empire.
Atahuallpa's presence at Cajamarca thus highlights one of the key factors
in world history: diseases transmitted to peoples lacking immunity by
invading peoples with considerable immunity. Smallpox, measles, influenza,
typhus, bubonic plague, and other infectious diseases endemic in
Europe played a decisive role in European conquests, by decimating many
peoples on other continents. For example, a smallpox epidemic devastated
the Aztecs after the failure of the first Spanish attack in 1520 and killed
Cuitlahuac, the Aztec emperor who briefly succeeded Montezuma.
7 8  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Throughout the Americas, diseases introduced with Europeans spread
from tribe to tribe far in advance of the Europeans themselves, killing an
estimated 95 percent of the pre-Columbian Native American population.
The most populous and highly organized native societies of North
America, the Mississippian chiefdoms, disappeared in that way between
1492 and the late 1600s, even before Europeans themselves made their
first settlement on the Mississippi River. A smallpox epidemic in 1713 was
the biggest single step in the destruction of South Africa's native San people
by European settlers. Soon after the British settlement of Sydney in 1788,
the first of the epidemics that decimated Aboriginal Australians began. A
well-documented example from Pacific islands is the epidemic that swept
over Fiji in 1806, brought by a few European sailors who struggled ashore
from the wreck of the ship Argo. Similar epidemics marked the histories
of Tonga, Hawaii, and other Pacific islands.
I do not mean to imply, however, that the role of disease in history was
confined to paving the way for European expansion. Malaria, yellow
fever, and other diseases of tropical Africa, India, Southeast Asia, and New
Guinea furnished the most important obstacle to European colonization
of those tropical areas.
How did Pizarro come to be at Cajamarca? Why didn't Atahuallpa
instead try to conquer Spain? Pizarro came to Cajamarca by means of
European maritime technology, which built the ships that took him across
the Atlantic from Spain to Panama, and then in the Pacific from Panama
to Peru. Lacking such technology, Atahuallpa did not expand overseas out
of South America.
In addition to the ships themselves, Pizarro's presence depended on the
centralized political organization that enabled Spain to finance, build,
staff, and equip the ships. The Inca Empire also had a centralized political
organization, but that actually worked to its disadvantage, because Pizarro
seized the Inca chain of command intact by capturing Atahuallpa. Since
the Inca bureaucracy was so strongly identified with its godlike absolute
monarch, it disintegrated after Atahuallpa's death. Maritime technology
coupled with political organization was similarly essential for European
expansions to other continents, as well as for expansions of many other
peoples.
A related factor bringing Spaniards to Peru was the existence of writing.
Spain possessed it, while the Inca Empire did not. Information could be
spread far more widely, more accurately, and in more detail by writing
COLLISION AT CAJAMARCA  79
than it could be transmitted by mouth. That information, coming back to
Spain from Columbus's voyages and from Cortes's conquest of Mexico,
sent Spaniards pouring into the New World. Letters and pamphlets supplied
both the motivation and the necessary detailed sailing directions. The
first published report of Pizarro's exploits, by his companion Captain Cristobal
de Mena, was printed in Seville in April 1534, a mere nine months
after Atahuallpa's execution. It became a best-seller, was rapidly translated
into other European languages, and sent a further stream of Spanish colonists
to tighten Pizarro's grip on Peru.
Why did Atahuallpa walk into the trap? In hindsight, we find it astonishing
that Atahuallpa marched into Pizarro's obvious trap at Cajamarca.
The Spaniards who captured him were equally surprised at their success.
The consequences of literacy are prominent in the ultimate explanation.
The immediate explanation is that Atahuallpa had very little information
about the Spaniards, their military power, and their intent. He derived
that scant information by word of mouth, mainly from an envoy who had
visited Pizarro's force for two days while it was en route inland from the
coast. That envoy saw the Spaniards at their most disorganized, told Atahuallpa
that they were not fighting men, and that he could tie them all up
if given 200 Indians. Understandably, it never occurred to Atahuallpa that
the Spaniards were formidable and would attack him without provocation.
In the New World the ability to write was confined to small elites
among some peoples of modern Mexico and neighboring areas far to the
north of the Inca Empire. Although the Spanish conquest of Panama, a
mere 600 miles from the Incas' northern boundary, began already in 1510,
no knowledge even of the Spaniards' existence appears to have reached
the Incas until Pizarro's first landing on the Peruvian coast in 1527. Atahuallpa
remained entirely ignorant about Spain's conquests of Central
America's most powerful and populous Indian societies.
As surprising to us today as Atahuallpa's behavior leading to his capture
is his behavior thereafter. He offered his famous ransom in the naive belief
that, once paid off, the Spaniards would release him and depart. He had
no way of understanding that Pizarro's men formed the spearhead of a
force bent on permanent conquest, rather than an isolated raid.
Atahuallpa was not alone in these fatal miscalculations. Even after Atahuallpa
had been captured, Francisco Pizarro's brother Hernando Pizarro
deceived Atahuallpa's leading general, Chalcuchima, commanding a large
80  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
army, into delivering himself to the Spaniards. Chalcuchima's miscalculation
marked a turning point in the collapse of Inca resistance, a moment
almost as significant as the capture of Atahuallpa himself. The Aztec
emperor Montezuma miscalculated even more grossly when he took Cortes
for a returning god and admitted him and his tiny army into the Aztec
capital of Tenochtitlan. The result was that Cortes captured Montezuma,
then went on to conquer Tenochtitlan and the Aztec Empire.
On a mundane level, the miscalculations by Atahuallpa, Chalcuchima,
Montezuma, and countless other Native American leaders deceived by
Europeans were due to the fact that no living inhabitants of the New
World had been to the Old World, so of course they could have had no
specific information about the Spaniards. Even so, we find it hard to avoid
the conclusion that Atahuallpa "should" have been more suspicious, if
only his society had experienced a broader range of human behavior.
Pizarro too arrived at Cajamarca with no information about the Incas
other than what he had learned by interrogating the Inca subjects he
encountered in 1527 and 1531. However, while Pizarro himself happened
to be illiterate, he belonged to a literate tradition. From books, the Spaniards
knew of many contemporary civilizations remote from Europe, and
about several thousand years of European history. Pizarro explicitly modeled
his ambush of Atahuallpa on the successful strategy of Cortes.
In short, literacy made the Spaniards heirs to a huge body of knowledge
about human behavior and history. By contrast, not only did Atahuallpa
have no conception of the Spaniards themselves, and no personal experience
of any other invaders from overseas, but he also had not even heard
(or read) of similar threats to anyone else, anywhere else, anytime previously
in history. That gulf of experience encouraged Pizarro to set his
trap and Atahuallpa to walk into it.
THUS, PIZARRO'S CAPTURE of Atahuallpa illustrates the set of proximate
factors that resulted in Europeans' colonizing the New World instead
of Native Americans' colonizing Europe. Immediate reasons for Pizarro's
success included military technology based on guns, steel weapons, and
horses; infectious diseases endemic in Eurasia; European maritime technology;
the centralized political organization of European states; and writing.
The title of this book will serve as shorthand for those proximate factors,
which also enabled modern Europeans to conquer peoples of other contiCOLLISION
AT CAJAMARCA  81
nents. Long before anyone began manufacturing guns and steel, others of
those same factors had led to the expansions of some non-European peoples,
as we shall see in later chapters.
But we are still left with the fundamental question why all those immediate
advantages came to lie more with Europe than with the New World.
Why weren't the Incas the ones to invent guns and steel swords, to be
mounted on animals as fearsome as horses, to bear diseases to which European
lacked resistance, to develop oceangoing ships and advanced political
organization, and to be able to draw on the experience of thousands of
years of written history? Those are no longer the questions of proximate
causation that this chapter has been discussing, but questions of ultimate
causation that will take up the next two parts of this book.

C H A P T E R 4
FARMER POWER
AS A TEENAGER, I SPENT THE SUMMER OF 1 9 5 6 IN MON-
. tana, working for an elderly farmer named Fred Hirschy. Born in
Switzerland, Fred had come to southwestern Montana as a teenager in the
1890s and proceeded to develop one of the first farms in the area. At the
time of his arrival, much of the original Native American population of
hunter-gatherers was still living there.
My fellow farmhands were, for the most part, tough whites whose normal
speech featured strings of curses, and who spent their weekdays working
so that they could devote their weekends to squandering their week's
wages in the local saloon. Among the farmhands, though, was a member
of the Blackfoot Indian tribe named Levi, who behaved very differently
from the coarse minersbeing polite, gentle, responsible, sober, and well
spoken. He was the first Indian with whom I had spent much time, and I
came to admire him.
It was therefore a shocking disappointment to me when, one Sunday
morning, Levi too staggered in drunk and cursing after a Saturday-night
binge. Among his curses, one has stood out in my memory: "Damn you,
Fred Hirschy, and damn the ship that brought you from Switzerland!" It
poignantly brought home to me the Indians' perspective on what I, like
other white schoolchildren, had been taught to view as the heroic conquest
8 6  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
of the American West. Fred Hirschy's family was proud of him, as a pioneer
farmer who had succeeded under difficult conditions. But Levi's tribe
of hunters and famous warriors had been robbed of its lands by the immigrant
white farmers. How did the farmers win out over the famous warriors?
For most of the time since the ancestors of modern humans diverged
from the ancestors of the living great apes, around 7 million years ago, all
humans on Earth fed themselves exclusively by hunting wild animals and
gathering wild plants, as the Blackfeet still did in the 19th century. It was
only within the last 11,000 years that some peoples turned to what is
termed food production: that is, domesticating wild animals and plants
and eating the resulting livestock and crops. Today, most people on Earth
consume food that they produced themselves or that someone else produced
for them. At current rates of change, within the next decade the few
remaining bands of hunter-gatherers will abandon their ways, disintegrate,
or die out, thereby ending our millions of years of commitment to the
hunter-gatherer lifestyle.
Different peoples acquired food production at different times in prehistory.
Some, such as Aboriginal Australians, never acquired it at all. Of
those who did, some (for example, the ancient Chinese) developed it independently
by themselves, while others (including ancient Egyptians)
acquired it from neighbors. But, as we'll see, food production was indirectly
a prerequisite for the development of guns, germs, and steel. Hence
geographic variation in whether, or when, the peoples of different continents
became farmers and herders explains to a large extent their subsequent
contrasting fates. Before we devote the next six chapters to
understanding how geographic differences in food production arose, this
chapter will trace the main connections through which food production
led to all the advantages that enabled Pizarro to capture Atahuallpa, and
Fred Hirschy's people to dispossess Levi's (Figure 4.1).
The first connection is the most direct one: availability of more consum-
Figure 4.1. Schematic overview of the chains of causation leading up to
proximate factors (such as guns, horses, and diseases) enabling some peoples
to conquer other peoples, from ultimate factors (such as the orientation
of continental axes). For example, diverse epidemic diseases of
humans evolved in areas with many wild plant and animal species suitable
for domestication, partly because the resulting crops and livestock
FARMER POWER  87
Factors Underlying the Broadest Pattern of History
helped feed dense societies in which epidemics could maintain themselves,
and partly because the diseases evolved from germs of the domestic
animals themselves.
8 8  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
able calories means more people. Among wild plant and animal species,
only a small minority are edible to humans or worth hunting or gathering.
Most species are useless to us as food, for one or more of the following
reasons: they are indigestible (like bark), poisonous (monarch butterflies
and death-cap mushrooms), low in nutritional value (jellyfish), tedious to
prepare (very small nuts), difficult to gather (larvae of most insects), or
dangerous to hunt (rhinoceroses). Most biomass (living biological matter)
on land is in the form of wood and leaves, most of which we cannot digest.
By selecting and growing those few species of plants and animals that
we can eat, so that they constitute 90 percent rather than 0.1 percent of
the biomass on an acre of land, we obtain far more edible calories per
acre. As a result, one acre can feed many more herders and farmers
typically, 10 to 100 times morethan hunter-gatherers. That strength of
brute numbers was the first of many military advantages that food-producing
tribes gained over hunter-gatherer tribes.
In human societies possessing domestic animals, livestock fed more people
in four distinct ways: by furnishing meat, milk, and fertilizer and by
pulling plows. First and most directly, domestic animals became the societies'
major source of animal protein, replacing wild game. Today, for
instance, Americans tend to get most of their animal protein from cows,
pigs, sheep, and chickens, with game such as venison just a rare delicacy.
In addition, some big domestic mammals served as sources of milk and of
milk products such as butter, cheese, and yogurt. Milked mammals include
the cow, sheep, goat, horse, reindeer, water buffalo, yak, and Arabian and
Bactrian camels. Those mammals thereby yield several times more calories
over their lifetime than if they were just slaughtered and consumed as
meat.
Big domestic mammals also interacted with domestic plants in two
ways to increase crop production. First, as any modern gardener or farmer
still knows by experience, crop yields can be greatly increased by manure
applied as fertilizer. Even with the modern availability of synthetic fertilizers
produced by chemical factories, the major source of crop fertilizer
today in most societies is still animal manureespecially of cows, but also
of yaks and sheep. Manure has been valuable, too, as a source of fuel for
fires in traditional societies.
In addition, the largest domestic mammals interacted with domestic
plants to increase food production by pulling plows and thereby making
it possible for people to till land that had previously been uneconomical
for farming. Those plow animals were the cow, horse, water buffalo, Bali
FARMER POWER  89
cattle, and yak / cow hybrids. Here is one example of their value: the first
prehistoric farmers of central Europe, the so-called Linearbandkeramik
culture that arose slightly before 5000 B.C., were initially confined to soils
light enough to be tilled by means of hand-held digging sticks. Only over
a thousand years later, with the introduction of the ox-drawn plow, were
those farmers able to extend cultivation to a much wider range of heavy
soils and tough sods. Similarly, Native American farmers of the North
American Great Plains grew crops in the river valleys, but farming of the
tough sods on the extensive uplands had to await 19th-century Europeans
and their animal-drawn plows.
All those are direct ways in which plant and animal domestication led
to denser human populations by yielding more food than did the huntergatherer
lifestyle. A more indirect way involved the consequences of the
sedentary lifestyle enforced by food production. People of many huntergatherer
societies move frequently in search of wild foods, but farmers
must remain near their fields and orchards. The resulting fixed abode contributes
to denser human populations by permitting a shortened birth
interval. A hunter-gatherer mother who is shifting camp can carry only
one child, along with her few possessions. She cannot afford to bear her
next child until the previous toddler can walk fast enough to keep up with
the tribe and not hold it back. In practice, nomadic hunter-gatherers space
their children about four years apart by means of lactational amenorrhea,
sexual abstinence, infanticide, and abortion. By contrast, sedentary people,
unconstrained by problems of carrying young children on treks, can
bear and raise as many children as they can feed. The birth interval for
many farm peoples is around two years, half that of hunter-gatherers. That
higher birthrate of food producers, together with their ability to feed more
people per acre, lets them achieve much higher population densities than
hunter-gatherers.
A separate consequence of a settled existence is that it permits one to
store food surpluses, since storage would be pointless if one didn't remain
nearby to guard the stored food. While some nomadic hunter-gatherers
may occasionally bag more food than they can consume in a few days,
such a bonanza is of little use to them because they cannot protect it.
But stored food is essential for feeding non-food-producing specialists, and
certainly for supporting whole towns of them. Hence nomadic huntergatherer
societies have few or no such full-time specialists, who instead
first appear in sedentary societies.
Two types of such specialists are kings and bureaucrats. Hunter-gath90
 GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
erer societies tend to be relatively egalitarian, to lack full-time bureaucrats
and hereditary chiefs, and to have small-scale political organization at the
level of the band or tribe. That's because all able-bodied hunter-gatherers
are obliged to devote much of their time to acquiring food. In contrast,
once food can be stockpiled, a political elite can gain control of food produced
by others, assert the right of taxation, escape the need to feed itself,
and engage full-time in political activities. Hence moderate-sized agricultural
societies are often organized in chiefdoms, and kingdoms are confined
to large agricultural societies. Those complex political units are much
better able to mount a sustained war of conquest than is an egalitarian
band of hunters. Some hunter-gatherers in especially rich environments,
such as the Pacific Northwest coast of North America and the coast of
Ecuador, also developed sedentary societies, food storage, and nascent
chiefdoms, but they did not go farther on the road to kingdoms.
A stored food surplus built up by taxation can support other full-time
specialists besides kings and bureaucrats. Of most direct relevance to wars
of conquest, it can be used to feed professional soldiers. That was the
decisive factor in the British Empire's eventual defeat of New Zealand's
well-armed indigenous Maori population. While the Maori achieved some
stunning temporary victories, they could not maintain an army constantly
in the field and were in the end worn down by 18,000 full-time British
troops. Stored food can also feed priests, who provide religious justification
for wars of conquest; artisans such as metalworkers, who develop
swords, guns, and other technologies; and scribes, who preserve far more
information than can be remembered accurately.
So far, I've emphasized direct and indirect values of crops and livestock
as food. However, they have other uses, such as keeping us warm and
providing us with valuable materials. Crops and livestock yield natural
fibers for making clothing, blankets, nets, and rope. Most of the major
centers of plant domestication evolved not only food crops but also fiber
cropsnotably cotton, flax (the source of linen), and hemp. Several
domestic animals yielded animal fibersespecially wool from sheep,
goats, llamas, and alpacas, and silk from silkworms. Bones of domestic
animals were important raw materials for artifacts of Neolithic peoples
before the development of metallurgy. Cow hides were used to make
leather. One of the earliest cultivated plants in many parts of the Americas
was grown for nonfood purposes: the bottle gourd, used as a container.
Big domestic mammals further revolutionized human society by becomFARMER
POWER  91
ing our main means of land transport until the development of railroads
in the 19th century. Before animal domestication, the sole means of transporting
goods and people by land was on the backs of humans. Large
mammals changed that: for the first time in human history, it became possible
to move heavy goods in large quantities, as well as people, rapidly
overland for long distances. The domestic animals that were ridden were
the horse, donkey, yak, reindeer, and Arabian and Bactrian camels. Animals
of those same five species, as well as the llama, were used to bear
packs. Cows and horses were hitched to wagons, while reindeer and dogs
pulled sleds in the Arctic. The horse became the chief means of long-distance
transport over most of Eurasia. The three domestic camel species
(Arabian camel, Bactrian camel, and llama) played a similar role in areas
of North Africa and Arabia, Central Asia, and the Andes, respectively.
The most direct contribution of plant and animal domestication to wars
of conquest was from Eurasia's horses, whose military role made them the
jeeps and Sherman tanks of ancient warfare on that continent. As I mentioned
in Chapter 3, they enabled Cortes and Pizarro, leading only small
bands of adventurers, to overthrow the Aztec and Inca Empires. Even
much earlier (around 4000 B.C.), at a time when horses were still ridden
bareback, they may have been the essential military ingredient behind the
westward expansion of speakers of Indo-European languages from the
Ukraine. Those languages eventually replaced all earlier western European
languages except Basque. When horses later were yoked to wagons and
other vehicles, horse-drawn battle chariots (invented around 1800 B.C.)
proceeded to revolutionize warfare in the Near East, the Mediterranean
region, and China. For example, in 1674 B.C., horses even enabled a foreign
people, the Hyksos, to conquer then horseless Egypt and to establish
themselves temporarily as pharaohs.
Still later, after the invention of saddles and stirrups, horses allowed the
Huns and successive waves of other peoples from the Asian steppes to
terrorize the Roman Empire and its successor states, culminating in the
Mongol conquests of much of Asia and Russia in the 13th and 14th centuries
A.D. Only with the introduction of trucks and tanks in World War I did
horses finally become supplanted as the main assault vehicle and means of
fast transport in war. Arabian and Bactrian camels played a similar military
role within their geographic range. In all these examples, peoples with
domestic horses (or camels), or with improved means of using them,
enjoyed an enormous military advantage over those without them.
92  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Of equal importance in wars of conquest were the germs that evolved in
human societies with domestic animals. Infectious diseases like smallpox,
measles, and flu arose as specialized germs of humans, derived by mutations
of very similar ancestral germs that had infected animals (Chapter
11). The humans who domesticated animals were the first to fall victim
to the newly evolved germs, but those humans then evolved substantial
resistance to the new diseases. When such partly immune people came
into contact with others who had had no previous exposure to the germs,
epidemics resulted in which up to 99 percent of the previously unexposed
population was killed. Germs thus acquired ultimately from domestic animals
played decisive roles in the European conquests of Native Americans,
Australians, South Africans, and Pacific islanders.
In short, plant and animal domestication meant much more food and
hence much denser human populations. The resulting food surpluses, and
(in some areas) the animal-based means of transporting those surpluses,
were a prerequisite for the development of settled, politically centralized,
socially stratified, economically complex, technologically innovative societies.
Hence the availability of domestic plants and animals ultimately
explains why empires, literacy, and steel weapons developed earliest in
Eurasia and later, or not at all, on other continents. The military uses of
horses and camels, and the killing power of animal-derived germs, complete
the list of major links between food production and conquest that
we shall be exploring.

C H A P T E R 8
APPLES OR INDIANS
WE HAVE JUST SEEN HOW PEOPLES OF SOME REGIONS
began to cultivate wild plant species, a step with momentous
unforeseen consequences for their lifestyle and their descendants' place in
history. Let us now return to our questions: Why did agriculture never
arise independently in some fertile and highly suitable areas, such as California,
Europe, temperate Australia, and subequatorial Africa? Why,
among the areas where agriculture did arise independently, did it develop
much earlier in some than in others?
Two contrasting explanations suggest themselves: problems with the
local people, or problems with the locally available wild plants. On the
one hand, perhaps almost any well-watered temperate or tropical area of
the globe offers enough species of wild plants suitable for domestication.
In that case, the explanation for agriculture's failure to develop in some of
those areas would lie with cultural characteristics of their peoples. On the
other hand, perhaps at least some humans in any large area of the globe
would have been receptive to the experimentation that led to domestication.
Only the lack of suitable wild plants might then explain why food
production did not evolve in some areas.
As we shall see in the next chapter, the corresponding problem for
domestication of big wild mammals proves easier to solve, because there
1 3 2 .  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
are many fewer species of them than of plants. The world holds only about
148 species of large wild mammalian terrestrial herbivores or omnivores,
the large mammals that could be considered candidates for domestication.
Only a modest number of factors determines whether a mammal is suitable
for domestication. It's thus straightforward to review a region's big mammals
and to test whether the lack of mammal domestication in some
regions was due to the unavailability of suitable wild species, rather than
to local peoples.
That approach would be much more difficult to apply to plants because
of the sheer number200,000of species of wild flowering plants, the
plants that dominate vegetation on the land and that have furnished
almost all of our crops. We can't possibly hope to examine all the wild
plant species of even a circumscribed area like California, and to assess
how many of them would have been domesticable. But we shall now see
how to get around that problem.
WHEN ONE HEARS that there are so many species of flowering plants,
one's first reaction might be as follows: surely, with all those wild plant
species on Earth, any area with a sufficiently benign climate must have
had more than enough species to provide plenty of candidates for crop
development.
But then reflect that the vast majority of wild plants are unsuitable for
obvious reasons: they are woody, they produce no edible fruit, and their
leaves and roots are also inedible. Of the 200,000 wild plant species, only
a few thousand are eaten by humans, and just a few hundred of these have
been more or less domesticated. Even of these several hundred crops, most
provide minor supplements to our diet and would not by themselves have
sufficed to support the rise of civilizations. A mere dozen species account
for over 80 percent of the modern world's annual tonnage of all crops.
Those dozen blockbusters are the cereals wheat, corn, rice, barley, and
sorghum; the pulse soybean; the roots or tubers potato, manioc, and sweet
potato; the sugar sources sugarcane and sugar beet; and the fruit banana.
Cereal crops alone now account for more than half of the calories consumed
by the world's human populations. With so few major crops in the
world, all of them domesticated thousands of years ago, it's less surprising
that many areas of the world had no wild native plants at all of outstanding
potential. Our failure to domesticate even a single major new food
APPLES OR INDIANS  1 3 3
plant in modern times suggests that ancient peoples really may have
explored virtually all useful wild plants and domesticated all the ones
worth domesticating.
Yet some of the world's failures to domesticate wild plants remain hard
to explain. The most flagrant cases concern plants that were domesticated
in one area but not in another. We can thus be sure that it was indeed
possible to develop the wild plant into a useful crop, and we have to ask
why that wild species was not domesticated in certain areas.
A typical puzzling example comes from Africa. The important cereal
sorghum was domesticated in Africa's Sahel zone, just south of the Sahara.
It also occurs as a wild plant as far south as southern Africa, yet neither it
nor any other plant was cultivated in southern Africa until the arrival of
the whole crop package that Bantu farmers brought from Africa north of
the equator 2,000 years ago. Why did the native peoples of southern
Africa not domesticate sorghum for themselves?
Equally puzzling is the failure of people to domesticate flax in its wild
range in western Europe and North Africa, or einkorn wheat in its wild
range in the southern Balkans. Since these two plants were among the first
eight crops of the Fertile Crescent, they were presumably among the most
readily domesticated of all wild plants. They were adopted for cultivation
in those areas of their wild range outside the Fertile Crescent as soon as
they arrived with the whole package of food production from the Fertile
Crescent. Why, then, had peoples of those outlying areas not already
begun to grow them of their own accord?
Similarly, the four earliest domesticated fruits of the Fertile Crescent all
had wild ranges stretching far beyond the eastern Mediterranean, where
they appear to have been first domesticated: the olive, grape, and fig
occurred west to Italy and Spain and Northwest Africa, while the date
palm extended to all of North Africa and Arabia. These four were evidently
among the easiest to domesticate of all wild fruits. Why did peoples
outside the Fertile Crescent fail to domesticate them, and begin to grow
them only when they had already been domesticated in the eastern Mediterranean
and arrived thence as crops?
Other striking examples involve wild species that were not domesticated
in areas where food production never arose spontaneously, even
though those wild species had close relatives domesticated elsewhere. For
example, the olive Olea europea was domesticated in the eastern Mediterranean.
There are about 40 other species of olives in tropical and southern
1 3 4 ' GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Africa, southern Asia, and eastern Australia, some of them closely related
to Olea europea, but none of them was ever domesticated. Similarly, while
a wild apple species and a wild grape species were domesticated in Eurasia,
there are many related wild apple and grape species in North America,
some of which have in modern times been hybridized with the crops
derived from their wild Eurasian counterparts in order to improve those
crops. Why, then, didn't Native Americans domesticate those apparently
useful apples and grapes themselves?
One can go on and on with such examples. But there is a fatal flaw in
this reasoning: plant domestication is not a matter of hunter-gatherers'
domesticating a single plant and otherwise carrying on unchanged with
their nomadic lifestyle. Suppose that North American wild apples really
would have evolved into a terrific crop if only Indian hunter-gatherers had
settled down and cultivated them. But nomadic hunter-gatherers would
not throw over their traditional way of life, settle in villages, and start
tending apple orchards unless many other domesticable wild plants and
animals were available to make a sedentary food-producing existence
competitive with a hunting-gathering existence.
How, in short, do we assess the potential of an entire local flora for
domestication? For those Native Americans who failed to domesticate
North American apples, did the problem really lie with the Indians or with
the apples?
In order to answer this question, we shall now compare three regions
that lie at opposite extremes among centers of independent domestication.
As we have seen, one of them, the Fertile Crescent, was perhaps the earliest
center of food production in the world, and the site of origin of several of
the modern world's major crops and almost all of its major domesticated
animals. The other two regions, New Guinea and the eastern United
States, did domesticate local crops, but these crops were very few in variety,
only one of them gained worldwide importance, and the resulting food
package failed to support extensive development of human technology and
political organization as in the Fertile Crescent. In the light of this comparison,
we shall ask: Did the flora and environment of the Fertile Crescent
have clear advantages over those of New Guinea and the eastern United
States?
ONE OF THE central facts of human history is the early importance of
the part of Southwest Asia known as the Fertile Crescent (because of the
APPLES OR INDIANS  1 3 5
crescent-like shape of its uplands on a map: see Figure 8.1). That area
appears to have been the earliest site for a whole string of developments,
including cities, writing, empires, and what we term (for better or worse)
civilization. All those developments sprang, in turn, from the dense human
populations, stored food surpluses, and feeding of nonfarming specialists
made possible by the rise of food production in the form of crop cultivation
and animal husbandry. Food production was the first of those major
innovations to appear in the Fertile Crescent. Hence any attempt to understand
the origins of the modern world must come to grips with the question
why the Fertile Crescent's domesticated plants and animals gave it
such a potent head start.
Fortunately, the Fertile Crescent is by far the most intensively studied
and best understood part of the globe as regards the rise of agriculture.
For most crops domesticated in or near the Fertile Crescent, the wild plant
ancestor has been identified; its close relationship to the crop has been
proven by genetic and chromosomal studies; its wild geographic range is
known; its changes under domestication have been identified and are often
understood at the level of single genes; those changes can be observed in
Figure 8.1. The Fertile Crescent, encompassing sites of food production
before 7000 B.C.
1 3 6  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
successive layers of the archaeological record; and the approximate place
and time of domestication are known. I don't deny that other areas, notably
China, also had advantages as early sites of domestication, but those
advantages and the resulting development of crops can be specified in
much more detail for the Fertile Crescent.
One advantage of the Fertile Crescent is that it lies within a zone of socalled
Mediterranean climate, a climate characterized by mild, wet winters
and long, hot, dry summers. That climate selects for plant species able to
survive the long dry season and to resume growth rapidly upon the return
of the rains. Many Fertile Crescent plants, especially species of cereals and
pulses, have adapted in a way that renders them useful to humans: they are
annuals, meaning that the plant itself dries up and dies in the dry season.
Within their mere one year of life, annual plants inevitably remain small
herbs. Many of them instead put much of their energy into producing big
seeds, which remain dormant during the dry season and are then ready to
sprout when the rains come. Annual plants therefore waste little energy on
making inedible wood or fibrous stems, like the body of trees and bushes.
But many of the big seeds, notably those of the annual cereals and pulses,
are edible by humans. They constitute 6 of the modern world's 12 major
crops. In contrast, if you live near a forest and look out your window, the
plant species that you see will tend to be trees and shrubs, most of whose
body you cannot eat and which put much less of their energy into edible
seeds. Of course, some forest trees in areas of wet climate do produce big
edible seeds, but these seeds are not adapted to surviving a long dry season
and hence to long storage by humans.
A second advantage of the Fertile Crescent flora is that the wild ancestors
of many Fertile Crescent crops were already abundant and highly productive,
occurring in large stands whose value must have been obvious to
hunter-gatherers. Experimental studies in which botanists have collected
seeds from such natural stands of wild cereals, much as hunter-gatherers
must have been doing over 10,000 years ago, show that annual harvests
of up to nearly a ton of seeds per hectare can be obtained, yielding 50
kilocalories of food energy for only one kilocalorie of work expended. By
collecting huge quantities of wild cereals in a short time when the seeds
were ripe, and storing them for use as food through the rest of the year,
some hunting-gathering peoples of the Fertile Crescent had already settled
down in permanent villages even before they began to cultivate plants.
Since Fertile Crescent cereals were so productive in the wild, few addiAPPLES
OR INDIANS  1 3 7
tional changes had to be made in them under cultivation. As we discussed
in the preceding chapter, the principal changesthe breakdown of the
natural systems of seed dispersal and of germination inhibitionevolved
automatically and quickly as soon as humans began to cultivate the seeds
in fields. The wild ancestors of our wheat and barley crops look so similar
to the crops themselves that the identity of the ancestor has never been in
doubt. Because of this ease of domestication, big-seeded annuals were the
first, or among the first, crops developed not only in the Fertile Crescent
but also in China and the Sahel.
Contrast this quick evolution of wheat and barley with the story of
corn, the leading cereal crop of the New World. Corn's probable ancestor,
a wild plant known as teosinte, looks so different from corn in its seed and
flower structures that even its role as ancestor has been hotly debated by
botanists for a long time. Teosinte's value as food would not have
impressed hunter-gatherers: it was less productive in the wild than wild
wheat, it produced much less seed than did the corn eventually developed
from it, and it enclosed its seeds in inedible hard coverings. For teosinte to
become a useful crop, it had to undergo drastic changes in its reproductive
biology, to increase greatly its investment in seeds, and to lose those rocklike
coverings of its seeds. Archaeologists are still vigorously debating how
many centuries or millennia of crop development in the Americas were
required for ancient corn cobs to progress from a tiny size up to the size
of a human thumb, but it seems clear that several thousand more years
were then required for them to reach modern sizes. That contrast between
the immediate virtues of wheat and barley and the difficulties posed by
teosinte may have been a significant factor in the differing developments
of New World and Eurasian human societies.
A third advantage of the Fertile Crescent flora is that it includes a high
percentage of hermaphroditic "selfers"that is, plants that usually pollinate
themselves but that are occasionally cross-pollinated. Recall that most
wild plants either are regularly cross-pollinated hermaphrodites or consist
of separate male and female individuals that inevitably depend on another
individual for pollination. Those facts of reproductive biology vexed early
farmers, because, as soon as they had located a productive mutant plant,
its offspring would cross-breed with other plant individuals and thereby
lose their inherited advantage. As a result, most crops belong to the small
percentage of wild plants that either are hermaphrodites usually pollinating
themselves or else reproduce without sex by propagating vegetatively
138  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
(for example, by a root that genetically duplicates the parent plant). Thus,
the high percentage of hermaphroditic selfers in the Fertile Crescent flora
aided early farmers, because it meant that a high percentage of the wild
flora had a reproductive biology convenient for humans.
Selfers were also convenient for early farmers in that they occasionally
did become cross-pollinated, thereby generating new varieties among
which to select. That occasional cross-pollination occurred not only
between individuals of the same species, but also between related species
to produce interspecific hybrids. One such hybrid among Fertile Crescent
selfers, bread wheat, became the most valuable crop in the modern world.
Of the first eight significant crops to have been domesticated in the Fertile
Crescent, all were selfers. Of the three selfer cereals among them
einkorn wheat, emmer wheat, and barleythe wheats offered the additional
advantage of a high protein content, 8-14 percent. In contrast, the
most important cereal crops of eastern Asia and of the New Worldrice
and corn, respectivelyhad a lower protein content that posed significant
nutritional problems.
THOSE WERE SOME of the advantages that the Fertile Crescent's flora
afforded the first farmers: it included an unusually high percentage of wild
plants suitable for domestication. However, the Mediterranean climate
zone of the Fertile Crescent extends westward through much of southern
Europe and northwestern Africa. There are also zones of similar Mediterranean
climates in four other parts of the world: California, Chile, southwestern
Australia, and South Africa (Figure 8.2). Yet those other
Mediterranean zones not only failed to rival the Fertile Crescent as early
sites of food production; they never gave rise to indigenous agriculture at
all. What advantage did that particular Mediterranean zone of western
Eurasia enjoy?
It turns out that it, and especially its Fertile Crescent portion, possessed
at least five advantages over other Mediterranean zones. First, western
Eurasia has by far the world's largest zone of Mediterranean climate. As a
result, it has a high diversity of wild plant and animal species, higher than
in the comparatively tiny Mediterranean zones of southwestern Australia
and Chile. Second, among Mediterranean zones, western Eurasia's experiences
the greatest climatic variation from season to season and year to
year. That variation favored the evolution, among the flora, of an espeAPPLES
OR INDIANS  139
Figure 8.2. The world's zones of Mediterranean climate.
daily high percentage of annual plants. The combination of these two factors
a high diversity of species and a high percentage of annualsmeans
that western Eurasia's Mediterranean zone is the one with by far the highest
diversity of annuals.
The significance of that botanical wealth for humans is illustrated by
the geographer Mark Blunder's studies of wild grass distributions. Among
the world's thousands of wild grass species, Blumler tabulated the 56 with
the largest seeds, the cream of nature's crop: the grass species with seeds
at least 10 times heavier than the median grass species (see Table 8.1).
Virtually all of them are native to Mediterranean zones or other seasonally
dry environments. Furthermore, they are overwhelmingly concentrated in
the Fertile Crescent or other parts of western Eurasia's Mediterranean
zone, which offered a huge selection to incipient farmers: about 32 of the
world's 56 prize wild grasses! Specifically, barley and emmer wheat, the
two earliest important crops of the Fertile Crescent, rank respectively 3rd
and 13th in seed size among those top 56. In contrast, the Mediterranean
zone of Chile offered only two of those species, California and southern
Africa just one each, and southwestern Australia none at all. That fact
alone goes a long way toward explaining the course of human history.
A third advantage of the Fertile Crescent's Mediterranean zone is that
140  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
TABLE 8.I World Distribution of Large-Seeded Grass Species
Table 12.1 of Mark Blunder's Ph.D. dissertation, "Seed Weight and Environment in Mediterranean-
type Grasslands in California and Israel" (University of California, Berkeley,
1992), listed the world's 56 heaviest-seeded wild grass species (excluding bamboos) for which
data were available. Grain weight in those species ranged from 10 milligrams to over 40
milligrams, about 10 times greater than the median value for all of the world's grass species.
Those 56 species make up less than 1 percent of the world's grass species. This table shows
that these prize grasses are overwhelmingly concentrated in the Mediterranean zone of western
Eurasia.
it provides a wide range of altitudes and topographies within a short distance.
Its range of elevations, from the lowest spot on Earth (the Dead
Sea) to mountains of 18,000 feet (near Teheran), ensures a corresponding
variety of environments, hence a high diversity of the wild plants serving
as potential ancestors of crops. Those mountains are in proximity to gentle
lowlands with rivers, flood plains, and deserts suitable for irrigation agriculture.
In contrast, the Mediterranean zones of southwestern Australia
and, to a lesser degree, of South Africa and western Europe offer a narrower
range of altitudes, habitats, and topographies.
The range of altitudes in the Fertile Crescent meant staggered harvest
seasons: plants at higher elevations produced seeds somewhat later than
plants at lower elevations. As a result, hunter-gatherers could move up
a mountainside harvesting grain seeds as they matured, instead of being
overwhelmed by a concentrated harvest season at a single altitude, where
all grains matured simultaneously. When cultivation began, it was a simple
APPLES OR INDIANS  141
matter for the first farmers to take the seeds of wild cereals growing on
hillsides and dependent on unpredictable rains, and to plant those seeds
in the damp valley bottoms, where they would grow reliably and be less
dependent on rain.
The Fertile Crescent's biological diversity over small distances contributed
to a fourth advantageits wealth in ancestors not only of valuable
crops but also of domesticated big mammals. As we shall see, there were
few or no wild mammal species suitable for domestication in the other
Mediterranean zones of California, Chile, southwestern Australia, and
South Africa. In contrast, four species of big mammalsthe goat, sheep,
pig, and cowwere domesticated very early in the Fertile Crescent, possibly
earlier than any other animal except the dog anywhere else in the
world. Those species remain today four of the world's five most important
domesticated mammals (Chapter 9). But their wild ancestors were commonest
in slightly different parts of the Fertile Crescent, with the result
that the four species were domesticated in different places: sheep possibly
in the central part, goats either in the eastern part at higher elevations (the
Zagros Mountains of Iran) or in the southwestern part (the Levant), pigs
in the north-central part, and cows in the western part, including Anatolia.
Nevertheless, even though the areas of abundance of these four wild progenitors
thus differed, all four lived in sufficiently close proximity that they
were readily transferred after domestication from one part of the Fertile
Crescent to another, and the whole region ended up with all four species.
Agriculture was launched in the Fertile Crescent by the early domestication
of eight crops, termed "founder crops" (because they founded agriculture
in the region and possibly in the world). Those eight founders were
the cereals emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, and barley; the pulses lentil, pea,
chickpea, and bitter vetch; and the fiber crop flax. Of these eight, only
two, flax and barley, range in the wild at all widely outside the Fertile
Crescent and Anatolia. Two of the founders had very small ranges in the
wild, chickpea being confined to southeastern Turkey and emmer wheat
to the Fertile Crescent itself. Thus, agriculture could arise in the Fertile
Crescent from domestication of locally available wild plants, without having
to wait for the arrival of crops derived from wild plants domesticated
elsewhere. Conversely, two of the eight founder crops could not have been
domesticated anywhere in the world except in the Fertile Crescent, since
they did not occur wild elsewhere.
Thanks to this availability of suitable wild mammals and plants, early
peoples of the Fertile Crescent could quickly assemble a potent and bal1
4 2 .  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
anced biological package for intensive food production. That package
comprised three cereals, as the main carbohydrate sources; four pulses,
with 20-25 percent protein, and four domestic animals, as the main protein
sources, supplemented by the generous protein content of wheat; and
flax as a source of fiber and oil (termed linseed oil: flax seeds are about 40
percent oil). Eventually, thousands of years after the beginnings of animal
domestication and food production, the animals also began to be used for
milk, wool, plowing, and transport. Thus, the crops and animals of the
Fertile Crescent's first farmers came to meet humanity's basic economic
needs: carbohydrate, protein, fat, clothing, traction, and transport.
A final advantage of early food production in the Fertile Crescent is that
it may have faced less competition from the hunter-gatherer lifestyle than
that in some other areas, including the western Mediterranean. Southwest
Asia has few large rivers and only a short coastline, providing relatively
meager aquatic resources (in the form of river and coastal fish and shellfish).
One of the important mammal species hunted for meat, the gazelle,
originally lived in huge herds but was overexploited by the growing human
population and reduced to low numbers. Thus, the food production package
quickly became superior to the hunter-gatherer package. Sedentary
villages based on cereals were already in existence before the rise of food
production and predisposed those hunter-gatherers to agriculture and
herding. In the Fertile Crescent the transition from hunting-gathering to
food production took place relatively fast: as late as 9000 B.C. people still
had no crops and domestic animals and were entirely dependent on wild
foods, but by 6000 B.C. some societies were almost completely dependent
on crops and domestic animals.
The situation in Mesoamerica contrasts strongly: that area provided
only two domesticable animals (the turkey and the dog), whose meat yield
was far lower than that of cows, sheep, goats, and pigs; and corn, Meso
america's staple grain, was, as I've already explained, difficult to domesticate
and perhaps slow to develop. As a result, domestication may not have
begun in Mesoamerica until around 3500 B.c. (the date remains very
uncertain); those first developments were undertaken by people who were
still nomadic hunter-gatherers; and settled villages did not arise there until
around 1500 B.C.
IN ALL THIS discussion of the Fertile Crescent's advantages for the early
rise of food production, we have not had to invoke any supposed advanAPPLES
OR INDIANS  143
tages of Fertile Crescent peoples themselves. Indeed, I am unaware of anyone's
even seriously suggesting any supposed distinctive biological features
of the region's peoples that might have contributed to the potency of its
food production package. Instead, we have seen that the many distinctive
features of the Fertile Crescent's climate, environment, wild plants, and
animals together provide a convincing explanation.
Since the food production packages arising indigenously in New Guinea
and in the eastern United States were considerably less potent, might the
explanation there lie with the peoples of those areas? Before turning to
those regions, however, we must consider two related questions arising in
regard to any area of the world where food production never developed
independently or else resulted in a less potent package. First, do huntergatherers
and incipient farmers really know well all locally available wild
species and their uses, or might they have overlooked potential ancestors
of valuable crops? Second, if they do know their local plants and animals,
do they exploit that knowledge to domesticate the most useful available
species, or do cultural factors keep them from doing so?
As regards the first question, an entire field of science, termed ethnobiol
ogy, studies peoples' knowledge of the wild plants and animals in their
environment. Such studies have concentrated especially on the world's few
surviving hunting-gathering peoples, and on farming peoples who still
depend heavily on wild foods and natural products. The studies generally
show that such peoples are walking encyclopedias of natural history, with
individual names (in their local language) for as many as a thousand or
more plant and animal species, and with detailed knowledge of those species'
biological characteristics, distribution, and potential uses. As people
become increasingly dependent on domesticated plants and animals, this
traditional knowledge gradually loses its value and becomes lost, until one
arrives at modern supermarket shoppers who could not distinguish a wild
grass from a wild pulse.
Here's a typical example. For the last 33 years, while conducting biological
exploration in New Guinea, I have been spending my field time there
constantly in the company of New Guineans who still use wild plants and
animals extensively. One day, when my companions of the Fore tribe and
I were starving in the jungle because another tribe was blocking our return
to our supply base, a Fore man returned to camp with a large rucksack
full of mushrooms he had found, and started to roast them. Dinner at
last! But then I had an unsettling thought: what if the mushrooms were
poisonous?
1 4 4 ' GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
I patiently explained to my Fore companions that I had read about some
mushrooms' being poisonous, that I had heard of even expert American
mushroom collectors' dying because of the difficulty of distinguishing safe
from dangerous mushrooms, and that although we were all hungry, it just
wasn't worth the risk. At that point my companions got angry and told
me to shut up and listen while they explained some things to me. After I
had been quizzing them for years about names of hundreds of trees and
birds, how could I insult them by assuming they didn't have names for
different mushrooms? Only Americans could be so stupid as to confuse
poisonous mushrooms with safe ones. They went on to lecture me about
29 types of edible mushroom species, each species' name in the Fore language,
and where in the forest one should look for it. This one, the tanti,
grew on trees, and it was delicious and perfectly edible.
Whenever I have taken New Guineans with me to other parts of their
island, they regularly talk about local plants and animals with other New
Guineans whom they meet, and they gather potentially useful plants and
bring them back to their home villages to try planting them. My experiences
with New Guineans are paralleled by those of ethnobiologists studying
traditional peoples elsewhere. However, all such peoples either
practice at least some food production or are the partly acculturated last
remnants of the world's former hunter-gatherer societies. Knowledge of
wild species was presumably even more detailed before the rise of food
production, when everyone on Earth still depended entirely on wild species
for food. The first farmers were heirs to that knowledge, accumulated
through tens of thousands of years of nature observation by biologically
modern humans living in intimate dependence on the natural world. It
therefore seems extremely unlikely that wild species of potential value
would have escaped the notice of the first farmers.
The other, related question is whether ancient hunter-gatherers and
farmers similarly put their ethnobiological knowledge to good use in
selecting wild plants to gather and eventually to cultivate. One test comes
from an archaeological site at the edge of the Euphrates Valley in Syria,
called Tell Abu Hureyra. Between 10,000 and 9000 B.C. the people living
there may already have been residing year-round in villages, but they were
still hunter-gatherers; crop cultivation began only in the succeeding millennium.
The archaeologists Gordon Hillman, Susan Colledge, and David
Harris retrieved large quantities of charred plant remains from the site,
probably representing discarded garbage of wild plants gathered elsewhere
APPLES OR INDIANS  145
and brought to the site by its residents. The scientists analyzed over 700
samples, each containing an average of over 500 identifiable seeds belonging
to over 70 plant species. It turned out that the villagers were collecting
a prodigious variety (157 species!) of plants identified by their charred
seeds, not to mention other plants that cannot now be identified.
Were those naive villagers collecting every type of seed plant that they
found, bringing it home, poisoning themselves on most of the species, and
nourishing themselves from only a few species? No, they were not so silly.
While 157 species sounds like indiscriminate collecting, many more species
growing wild in the vicinity were absent from the charred remains. The
157 selected species fall into three categories. Many of them have seeds
that are nonpoisonous and immediately edible. Others, such as pulses and
members of the mustard family, have toxic seeds, but the toxins are easily
removed, leaving the seeds edible. A few seeds belong to species traditionally
used as sources of dyes or medicine. The many wild species not represented
among the 157 selected are ones that would have been useless or
harmful to people, including all of the most toxic weed species in the environment.
Thus, the hunter-gatherers of Tell Abu Hureyra were not wasting time
and endangering themselves by collecting wild plants indiscriminately.
Instead, they evidently knew the local wild plants as intimately as do modern
New Guineans, and they used that knowledge to select and bring home
only the most useful available seed plants. But those gathered seeds would
have constituted the material for the unconscious first steps of plant
domestication.
My other example of how ancient peoples apparently used their ethno
biological knowledge to good effect comes from the Jordan Valley in the
ninth millennium B.C., the period of the earliest crop cultivation there. The
valley's first domesticated cereals were barley and emmer wheat, which are
still among the world's most productive crops today. But, as at Tell Abu
Hureyra, hundreds of other seed-bearing wild plant species must have
grown in the vicinity, and a hundred or more of them would have been
edible and gathered before the rise of plant domestication. What was it
about barley and emmer wheat that caused them to be the first crops?
Were those first Jordan Valley farmers botanical ignoramuses who didn't
know what they were doing? Or were barley and emmer wheat actually
the best of the local wild cereals that they could have selected?
Two Israeli scientists, Ofer Bar-Yosef and Mordechai Kislev, tackled this
146  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
question by examining the wild grass species still growing wild in the valley
today. Leaving aside species with small or unpalatable seeds, they
picked out 23 of the most palatable and largest-seeded wild grasses. Not
surprisingly, barley and emmer wheat were on that list.
But it wasn't true that the 21 other candidates would have been equally
useful. Among those 23, barley and emmer wheat proved to be the best by
many criteria. Emmer wheat has the biggest seeds and barley the second
biggest. In the wild, barley is one of the 4 most abundant of the 23 species,
while emmer wheat is of medium abundance. Barley has the further advantage
that its genetics and morphology permit it to evolve quickly the useful
changes in seed dispersal and germination inhibition that we discussed in
the preceding chapter. Emmer wheat, however, has compensating virtues:
it can be gathered more efficiently than barley, and it is unusual among
cereals in that its seeds do not adhere to husks. As for the other 21 species,
their drawbacks include smaller seeds, in many cases lower abundance,
and in some cases their being perennial rather than annual plants, with the
consequence that they would have evolved only slowly under domestication.
Thus, the first farmers in the Jordan Valley selected the 2 very best of
the 23 best wild grass species available to them. Of course, the evolutionary
changes (following cultivation) in seed dispersal and germination inhibition
would have been unforeseen consequences of what those first
farmers were doing. But their initial selection of barley and emmer wheat
rather than other cereals to collect, bring home, and cultivate would have
been conscious and based on the easily detected criteria of seed size, palat
ability, and abundance.
This example from the Jordan Valley, like that from Tell Abu Hureyra,
illustrates that the first farmers used their detailed knowledge of local species
to their own benefit. Knowing far more about local plants than all but
a handful of modern professional botanists, they would hardly have failed
to cultivate any useful wild plant species that was comparably suitable for
domestication.
WE CAN NOW examine what local farmers, in two parts of the world
(New Guinea and the eastern United States) with indigenous but apparently
deficient food production systems compared to that of the Fertile
Crescent, actually did when more-productive crops arrived from elseAPPLES
OR INDIANS  147
where. If it turned out that such crops did not become adopted for cultural
or other reasons, we would be left with a nagging doubt. Despite all our
reasoning so far, we would still have to suspect that the local wild flora
harbored some ancestor of a potential valuable crop that local farmers
failed to exploit because of similar cultural factors. These two examples
will also demonstrate in detail a fact critical to history: that indigenous
crops from different parts of the globe were not equally productive.
New Guinea, the largest island in the world after Greenland, lies just
north of Australia and near the equator. Because of its tropical location
and great diversity in topography and habitats, New Guinea is rich in both
plant and animal species, though less so than continental tropical areas
because it is an island. People have been living in New Guinea for at least
40,000 yearsmuch longer than in the Americas, and slightly longer than
anatomically modern peoples have been living in western Europe. Thus,
New Guineans have had ample opportunity to get to know their local flora
and fauna. Were they motivated to apply this knowledge to developing
food production?
I mentioned already that the adoption of food production involved a
competition between the food producing and the hunting-gathering lifestyles.
Hunting-gathering is not so rewarding in New Guinea as to remove
the motivation to develop food production. In particular, modern New
Guinea hunters suffer from the crippling disadvantage of a dearth of wild
game: there is no native land animal larger than a 100-pound flightless
bird (the cassowary) and a 50-pound kangaroo. Lowland New Guineans
on the coast do obtain much fish and shellfish, and some lowlanders in the
interior still live today as hunter-gatherers, subsisting especially on wild
sago palms. But no peoples still live as hunter-gatherers in the New Guinea
highlands; all modern highlanders are instead farmers who use wild foods
only to supplement their diets. When highlanders go into the forest on
hunting trips, they take along garden-grown vegetables to feed themselves.
If they have the misfortune to run out of those provisions, even they starve
to death despite their detailed knowledge of locally available wild foods.
Since the hunting-gathering lifestyle is thus nonviable in much of modern
New Guinea, it comes as no surprise that all New Guinea highlanders and
most lowlanders today are settled farmers with sophisticated systems of
food production. Extensive, formerly forested areas of the highlands were
converted by traditional New Guinea farmers to fenced, drained, intensively
managed field systems supporting dense human populations.
148  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Archaeological evidence shows that the origins of New Guinea agriculture
are ancient, dating to around 7000 B.C. At those early dates all the
landmasses surrounding New Guinea were still occupied exclusively by
hunter-gatherers, so this ancient agriculture must have developed independently
in New Guinea. While unequivocal remains of crops have not been
recovered from those early fields, they are likely to have included some of
the same crops that were being grown in New Guinea at the time of European
colonization and that are now known to have been domesticated
locally from wild New Guinea ancestors. Foremost among these local
domesticates is the modern world's leading crop, sugarcane, of which the
annual tonnage produced today nearly equals that of the number two and
number three crops combined (wheat and corn). Other crops of
undoubted New Guinea origin are a group of bananas known as Aus
tralimusa bananas, the nut tree Canarium indicum, and giant swamp taro,
as well as various edible grass stems, roots, and green vegetables. The
breadfruit tree and the root crops yams and (ordinary) taro may also be
New Guinean domesticates, although that conclusion remains uncertain
because their wild ancestors are not confined to New Guinea but are distributed
from New Guinea to Southeast Asia. At present we lack evidence
that could resolve the question whether they were domesticated in Southeast
Asia, as traditionally assumed, or independently or even only in New
Guinea.
However, it turns out that New Guinea's biota suffered from three
severe limitations. First, no cereal crops were domesticated in New
Guinea, whereas several vitally important ones were domesticated in the
Fertile Crescent, Sahel, and China. In its emphasis instead on root and tree
crops, New Guinea carries to an extreme a trend seen in agricultural systems
in other wet tropical areas (the Amazon, tropical West Africa, and
Southeast Asia), whose farmers also emphasized root crops but did manage
to come up with at least two cereals (Asian rice and a giant-seeded
Asian cereal called Job's tears). A likely reason for the failure of cereal
agriculture to arise in New Guinea is a glaring deficiency of the wild starting
material: not one of the world's 56 largest-seeded wild grasses is native
there.
Second, the New Guinea fauna included no domesticable large mammal
species whatsoever. The sole domestic animals of modern New Guinea,
the pig and chicken and dog, arrived from Southeast Asia by way of Indonesia
within the last several thousand years. As a result, while New Guinea
APPLES OR INDIANS  149
lowlanders obtain protein from the fish they catch, New Guinea highland
farmer populations suffer from severe protein limitation, because the staple
crops that provide most of their calories (taro and sweet potato) are
low in protein. Taro, for example, consists of barely 1 percent protein,
much worse than even white rice, and far below the levels of the Fertile
Crescent's wheats and pulses (8-14 percent and 20-25 percent protein,
respectively).
Children in the New Guinea highlands have the swollen bellies characteristic
of a high-bulk but protein-deficient diet. New Guineans old and
young routinely eat mice, spiders, frogs, and other small animals that peoples
elsewhere with access to large domestic mammals or large wild game
species do not bother to eat. Protein starvation is probably also the ultimate
reason why cannibalism was widespread in traditional New Guinea
highland societies.
Finally, in former times New Guinea's available root crops were limiting
for calories as well as for protein, because they do not grow well at the
high elevations where many New Guineans live today. Many centuries
ago, however, a new root crop of ultimately South American origin, the
sweet potato, reached New Guinea, probably by way of the Philippines,
where it had been introduced by Spaniards. Compared with taro and other
presumably older New Guinea root crops, the sweet potato can be grown
up to higher elevations, grows more quickly, and gives higher yields per
acre cultivated and per hour of labor. The result of the sweet potato's
arrival was a highland population explosion. That is, even though people
had been farming in the New Guinea highlands for many thousands of
years before sweet potatoes were introduced, the available local crops had
limited them in the population densities they could attain, and in the elevations
they could occupy.
In short, New Guinea offers an instructive contrast to the Fertile Crescent.
Like hunter-gatherers of the Fertile Crescent, those of New Guinea
did evolve food production independently. However, their indigenous food
production was restricted by the local absence of domesticable cereals,
pulses, and animals, by the resulting protein deficiency in the highlands,
and by limitations of the locally available root crops at high elevations.
Yet New Guineans themselves know as much about the wild plants and
animals available to them as any peoples on Earth today. They can be
expected to have discovered and tested any wild plant species worth
domesticating. They are perfectly capable of recognizing useful additions
150  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
to their crop larder, as is shown by their exuberant adoption of the sweet
potato when it arrived. That same lesson is being driven home again in
New Guinea today, as those tribes with preferential access to introduced
new crops and livestock (or with the cultural willingness to adopt them)
expand at the expense of tribes without that access or willingness. Thus,
the limits on indigenous food production in New Guinea had nothing to
do with New Guinea peoples, and everything with the New Guinea biota
and environment.
OUR OTHER EXAMPLE of indigenous agriculture apparently constrained
by the local flora comes from the eastern United States. Like New
Guinea, that area supported independent domestication of local wild
plants. However, early developments are much better understood for the
eastern United States than for New Guinea: the crops grown by the earliest
farmers have been identified, and the dates and crop sequences of local
domestication are known. Well before other crops began to arrive from
elsewhere, Native Americans settled in eastern U.S. river valleys and developed
intensified food production based on local crops. Hence they were in
a position to take advantage of the most promising wild plants. Which
ones did they actually cultivate, and how did the resulting local crop package
compare with the Fertile Crescent's founder package?
It turns out that the eastern U.S. founder crops were four plants domesticated
in the period 2500-1500 B.C., a full 6,000 years after wheat and
barley domestication in the Fertile Crescent. A local species of squash provided
small containers, as well as yielding edible seeds. The remaining
three founders were grown solely for their edible seeds (sunflower, a daisy
relative called sumpweed, and a distant relative of spinach called goosefoot).
But four seed crops and a container fall far short of a complete food
production package. For 2,000 years those founder crops served only as
minor dietary supplements while eastern U.S. Native Americans continued
to depend mainly on wild foods, especially wild mammals and waterbirds,
fish, shellfish, and nuts. Farming did not supply a major part of their diet
until the period 500-200 B.c., after three more seed crops (knotweed,
maygrass, and little barley) had been brought into cultivation.
A modern nutritionist would have applauded those seven eastern U.S.
APPLES OR INDIANS  151
crops. All of them were high in protein17-32 percent, compared with
8-14 percent for wheat, 9 percent for corn, and even lower for barley and
white rice. Two of them, sunflower and sumpweed, were also high in oil
(45-47 percent). Sumpweed, in particular, would have been a nutritionist's
ultimate dream, being 32 percent protein and 45 percent oil. Why aren't
we still eating those dream foods today?
Alas, despite their nutritional advantage, most of these eastern U.S.
crops suffered from serious disadvantages in other respects. Goosefoot,
knotweed, little barley, and maygrass had tiny seeds, with volumes only
one-tenth that of wheat and barley seeds. Worse yet, sumpweed is a windpollinated
relative of ragweed, the notorious hayfever-causing plant. Like
ragweed's, sumpweed's pollen can cause hayfever where the plant occurs
in abundant stands. If that doesn't kill your enthusiasm for becoming a
sumpweed farmer, be aware that it has a strong odor objectionable to
some people and that handling it can cause skin irritation.
Mexican crops finally began to reach the eastern United States by trade
routes after A.D. 1. Corn arrived around A.D. 200, but its role remained
very minor for many centuries. Finally, around A.D. 900 a new variety of
corn adapted to North America's short summers appeared, and the arrival
of beans around A.D. 1100 completed Mexico's crop trinity of corn, beans,
and squash. Eastern U.S. farming became greatly intensified, and densely
populated chiefdoms developed along the Mississippi River and its tributaries.
In some areas the original local domesticates were retained alongside
the far more productive Mexican trinity, but in other areas the trinity
replaced them completely. No European ever saw sumpweed growing in
Indian gardens, because it had disappeared as a crop by the time that European
colonization of the Americas began, in A.D. 1492. Among all those
ancient eastern U.S. crop specialties, only two (sunflower and eastern
squash) have been able to compete with crops domesticated elsewhere and
are still grown today. Our modern acorn squashes and summer squashes
are derived from those American squashes domesticated thousands of
years ago.
Thus, like the case of New Guinea, that of the eastern United States is
instructive. A priori, the region might have seemed a likely one to support
productive indigenous agriculture. It has rich soils, reliable moderate rainfall,
and a suitable climate that sustains bountiful agriculture today. The
flora is a species-rich one that includes productive wild nut trees (oak and
1 5 2 .  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
hickory). Local Native Americans did develop an agriculture based on
local domesticates, did thereby support themselves in villages, and even
developed a cultural florescence (the Hopewell culture centered on what is
today Ohio) around 200 B.C.-A.D. 400. They were thus in a position for
several thousand years to exploit as potential crops the most useful available
wild plants, whatever those should be.
Nevertheless, the Hopewell florescence sprang up nearly 9,000 years
after the rise of village living in the Fertile Crescent. Still, it was not until
after A.D. 900 that the assembly of the Mexican crop trinity triggered a
larger population boom, the so-called Mississippian florescence, which
produced the largest towns and most complex societies achieved by Native
Americans north of Mexico. But that boom came much too late to prepare
Native Americans of the United States for the impending disaster of European
colonization. Food production based on eastern U.S. crops alone had
been insufficient to trigger the boom, for reasons that are easy to specify.
The area's available wild cereals were not nearly as useful as wheat and
barley. Native Americans of the eastern United States domesticated no
locally available wild pulse, no fiber crop, no fruit or nut tree. They had
no domesticated animals at all except for dogs, which were probably
domesticated elsewhere in the Americas.
It's also clear that Native Americans of the eastern United States were
not overlooking potential major crops among the wild species around
them. Even 20th-century plant breeders, armed with all the power of modern
science, have had little success in exploiting North American wild
plants. Yes, we have now domesticated pecans as a nut tree and blueberries
as a fruit, and we have improved some Eurasian fruit crops (apples, plums,
grapes, raspberries, blackberries, strawberries) by hybridizing them with
North American wild relatives. However, those few successes have
changed our food habits far less than Mexican corn changed food habits
of Native Americans in the eastern United States after A.D. 900.
The farmers most knowledgeable about eastern U.S. domesticates, the
region's Native Americans themselves, passed judgment on them by discarding
or deemphasizing them when the Mexican trinity arrived. That
outcome also demonstrates that Native Americans were not constrained
by cultural conservativism and were quite able to appreciate a good plant
when they saw it. Thus, as in New Guinea, the limitations on indigenous
food production in the eastern United States were not due to Native AmerAPPLES
OR INDIANS  153
ican peoples themselves, but instead depended entirely on the American
biota and environment.
WE HAVE NOW considered examples of three contrasting areas, in all of
which food production did arise indigenously. The Fertile Crescent lies at
one extreme; New Guinea and the eastern United States lie at the opposite
extreme. Peoples of the Fertile Crescent domesticated local plants much
earlier. They domesticated far more species, domesticated far more productive
or valuable species, domesticated a much wider range of types of
crops, developed intensified food production and dense human populations
more rapidly, and as a result entered the modern world with more
advanced technology, more complex political organization, and more epidemic
diseases with which to infect other peoples.
We found that these differences between the Fertile Crescent, New
Guinea, and the eastern United States followed straightforwardly from the
differing suites of wild plant and animal species available for domestication,
not from limitations of the peoples themselves. When more-productive
crops arrived from elsewhere (the sweet potato in New Guinea, the
Mexican trinity in the eastern United States), local peoples promptly took
advantage of them, intensified food production, and increased greatly in
population. By extension, I suggest that areas of the globe where food
production never developed indigenously at allCalifornia, Australia, the
Argentine pampas, western Europe, and so onmay have offered even
less in the way of wild plants and animals suitable for domestication than
did New Guinea and the eastern United States, where at least a limited
food production did arise. Indeed, Mark Blumler's worldwide survey of
locally available large-seeded wild grasses mentioned in this chapter, and
the worldwide survey of locally available big mammals to be presented in
the next chapter, agree in showing that all those areas of nonexistent or
limited indigenous food production were deficient in wild ancestors of
domesticable livestock and cereals.
Recall that the rise of food production involved a competition between
food production and hunting-gathering. One might therefore wonder
whether all these cases of slow or nonexistent rise of food production
might instead have been due to an exceptional local richness of resources
to be hunted and gathered, rather than to an exceptional availability of
1 5 4 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
species suitable for domestication. In fact, most areas where indigenous
food production arose late or not at all offered exceptionally poor rather
than rich resources to hunter-gatherers, because most large mammals of
Australia and the Americas (but not of Eurasia and Africa) had become
extinct toward the end of the Ice Ages. Food production would have faced
even less competition from hunting-gathering in these areas than it did
in the Fertile Crescent. Hence these local failures or limitations of food
production cannot be attributed to competition from bountiful hunting
opportunities.
LEST THESE CONCLUSIONS be misinterpreted, we should end this
chapter with caveats against exaggerating two points: peoples' readiness
to accept better crops and livestock, and the constraints imposed by locally
available wild plants and animals. Neither that readiness nor those constraints
are absolute.
We've already discussed many examples of local peoples' adopting
more-productive crops domesticated elsewhere. Our broad conclusion is
that people can recognize useful plants, would therefore have probably
recognized better local ones suitable for domestication if any had existed,
and aren't barred from doing so by cultural conservatism or taboos. But a
big qualifier must be added to this sentence: "in the long run and over
large areas." Anyone knowledgeable about human societies can cite innumerable
examples of societies that refused crops, livestock, and other innovations
that would have been productive.
Naturally, I don't subscribe to the obvious fallacy that every society
promptly adopts every innovation that would be useful for it. The fact is
that, over entire continents and other large areas containing hundreds of
competing societies, some societies will be more open to innovation, and
some will be more resistant. The ones that do adopt new crops, livestock,
or technology may thereby be enabled to nourish themselves better and to
outbreed, displace, conquer, or kill off societies resisting innovation.
That's an important phenomenon whose manifestations extend far beyondthe
adoption of new crops, and to which we shall return in Chapter 13.
Our other caveat concerns the limits that locally available wild species
set on the rise of food production. I'm not saying that food production
could never, in any amount of time, have arisen in all those areas where it
actually had not arisen indigenously by modern times. Europeans today

LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK  1 9 7
from diseases of animals, even though most of the microbes responsible
for our own epidemic illnesses are paradoxically now almost confined to
humans. Because diseases have been the biggest killers of people, they have
also been decisive shapers of history. Until World War II, more victims of
war died of war-borne microbes than of battle wounds. All those military
histories glorifying great generals oversimplify the ego-deflating truth: the
winners of past wars were not always the armies with the best generals
and weapons, but were often merely those bearing the nastiest germs to
transmit to their enemies.
The grimmest examples of germs' role in history come from the European
conquest of the Americas that began with Columbus's voyage of
1492. Numerous as were the Native American victims of the murderous
Spanish conquistadores, they were far outnumbered by the victims of murderous
Spanish microbes. Why was the exchange of nasty germs between
the Americas and Europe so unequal? Why didn't Native American diseases
instead decimate the Spanish invaders, spread back to Europe, and
wipe out 95 percent of Europe's population? Similar questions arise for
the decimation of many other native peoples by Eurasian germs, as well as
for the decimation of would-be European conquistadores in the tropics of
Africa and Asia.
Thus, questions of the animal origins of human disease lie behind the
broadest pattern of human history, and behind some of the most important
issues in human health today. (Think of AIDS, an explosively spreading
human disease that appears to have evolved from a virus resident in wild
African monkeys.) This chapter will begin by considering what a "disease"
is, and why some microbes have evolved so as to "make us sick," whereas
most other species of living things don't make us sick. We'll examine why
many of our most familiar infectious diseases run in epidemics, such as our
current AIDS epidemic and the Black Death (bubonic plague) epidemics of
the Middle Ages. We'll then consider how the ancestors of microbes now
confined to us transferred themselves from their original animal hosts.
Finally, we'll see how insight into the animal origins of our infectious diseases
helps explain the momentous, almost one-way exchange of germs
between Europeans and Native Americans.
NATURALLY, WE'RE DISPOSED to think about diseases just from our
own point of view: what can we do to save ourselves and to kill the
1 9 8  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
microbes? Let's stamp out the scoundrels, and never mind what their
motives are! In life in general, though, one has to understand the enemy in
order to beat him, and that's especially true in medicine.
Hence let's begin by temporarily setting aside our human bias and considering
disease from the microbes' point of view. After all, microbes are
as much a product of natural selection as we are. What evolutionary benefit
does a microbe derive from making us sick in bizarre ways, like giving
us genital sores or diarrhea? And why should microbes evolve so as to kill
us? That seems especially puzzling and self-defeating, since a microbe that
kills its host kills itself.
Basically, microbes evolve like other species. Evolution selects for those
individuals most effective at producing babies and at helping them spread
to suitable places to live. For a microbe, spread may be defined mathematically
as the number of new victims infected per each original patient. That
number depends on how long each victim remains capable of infecting
new victims, and how efficiently the microbe is transferred from one victim
to the next.
Microbes have evolved diverse ways of spreading from one person to
another, and from animals to people. The germ that spreads better leaves
more babies and ends up favored by natural selection. Many of our
"symptoms" of disease actually represent ways in which some damned
clever microbe modifies our bodies or our behavior such that we become
enlisted to spread microbes.
The most effortless way a germ could spread is by just waiting to be
transmitted passively to the next victim. That's the strategy practiced by
microbes that wait for one host to be eaten by the next host: for instance,
salmonella bacteria, which we contract by eating already infected eggs or
meat; the worm responsible for trichinosis, which gets from pigs to us by
waiting for us to kill the pig and eat it without proper cooking; and the
worm causing anisakiasis, with which sushi-loving Japanese and Americans
occasionally infect themselves by consuming raw fish. Those parasites
pass to a person from an eaten animal, but the virus causing laughing
sickness (kuru) in the New Guinea highlands used to pass to a person from
another person who was eaten. It was transmitted by cannibalism, when
highland babies made the fatal mistake of licking their fingers after playing
with raw brains that their mothers had just cut out of dead kuru victims
awaiting cooking.
Some microbes don't wait for the old host to die and get eaten, but
LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK  1 9 9
instead hitchhike in the saliva of an insect that bites the old host and flies
off to find a new host. The free ride may be provided by mosquitoes, fleas,
lice, or tsetse flies that spread malaria, plague, typhus, or sleeping sickness,
respectively. The dirtiest of all tricks for passive carriage is perpetrated by
microbes that pass from a woman to her fetus and thereby infect babies
already at birth. By playing that trick, the microbes responsible for syphilis,
rubella, and now AIDS pose ethical dilemmas with which believers in
a fundamentally just universe have had to struggle desperately.
Other germs take matters into their own hands, figuratively speaking.
They modify the anatomy or habits of their host in such a way as to accelerate
their transmission. From our perspective, the open genital sores
caused by venereal diseases like syphilis are a vile indignity. From the
microbes' point of view, however, they're just a useful device to enlist a
host's help in inoculating microbes into a body cavity of a new host. The
skin lesions caused by smallpox similarly spread microbes by direct or
indirect body contact (occasionally very indirect, as when U.S. whites bent
on wiping out "belligerent" Native Americans sent them gifts of blankets
previously used by smallpox patients).
More vigorous yet is the strategy practiced by the influenza, common
cold, and pertussis (whooping cough) microbes, which induce the victim
to cough or sneeze, thereby launching a cloud of microbes toward prospective
new hosts. Similarly, the cholera bacterium induces in its victim a massive
diarrhea that delivers bacteria into the water supplies of potential new
victims, while the virus responsible for Korean hemorrhagic fever broadcasts
itself in the urine of mice. For modification of a host's behavior, nothing
matches rabies virus, which not only gets into the saliva of an infected
dog but drives the dog into a frenzy of biting and thus infecting many new
victims. But for physical effort on the bug's own part, the prize still goes
to worms such as hookworms and schistosomes, which actively burrow
through a host's skin from the water or soil into which their larvae had
been excreted in a previous victim's feces.
Thus, from our point of view, genital sores, diarrhea, and coughing are
"symptoms of disease." From a germ's point of view, they're clever evolutionary
strategies to broadcast the germ. That's why it's in the germ's interests
to "make us sick." But why should a germ evolve the apparently selfdefeating
strategy of killing its host?
From the germ's perspective, that's just an unintended by-product (fat
consolation to us!) of host symptoms promoting efficient transmission of
200  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
microbes. Yes, an untreated cholera patient may eventually die from producing
diarrheal fluid at a rate of several gallons per day. At least for a
while, though, as long as the patient is still alive, the cholera bacterium
profits from being massively broadcast into the water supplies of its next
victims. Provided that each victim thereby infects on the average more
than one new victim, the bacterium will spread, even though the first host
happens to die.
So MUCH FOR our dispassionate examination of the germ's interests.
Now let's get back to considering our own selfish interests: to stay alive
and healthy, best done by killing the damned germs. One common
response of ours to infection is to develop a fever. Again, we're used to
considering fever as a "symptom of disease," as if it developed inevitably
without serving any function. But regulation of body temperature is under
our genetic control and doesn't just happen by accident. A few microbes
are more sensitive to heat than our own bodies are. By raising our body
temperature, we in effect try to bake the germs to death before we get
baked ourselves.
Another common response of ours is to mobilize our immune system.
White blood cells and other cells of ours actively seek out and kill foreign
microbes. The specific antibodies that we gradually build up against a particular
microbe infecting us make us less likely to get reinfected once we
become cured. As we all know from experience, there are some illnesses,
such as flu and the common cold, to which our resistance is only temporary;
we can eventually contract the illness again. Against other illnesses,
thoughincluding measles, mumps, rubella, pertussis, and the now
defeated smallpoxour antibodies stimulated by one infection confer lifelong
immunity. That's the principle of vaccination: to stimulate our antibody
production without our having to go through the actual experience
of the disease, by inoculating us with a dead or weakened strain of
microbe.
Alas, some clever microbes don't just cave in to our immune defenses.
Some have learned to trick us by changing those molecular pieces of the
microbe (its so-called antigens) that our antibodies recognize. The constant
evolution or recycling of new strains of flu, with differing antigens,
explains why your having gotten flu two years ago didn't protect you
LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK  201
against the different strain that arrived this year. Malaria and sleeping
sickness are even more slippery customers in their ability rapidly to change
their antigens. Among the slipperiest of all is AIDS, which evolves new
antigens even as it sits within an individual patient, thereby eventually
overwhelming his or her immune system.
Our slowest defensive response is through natural selection, which
changes our gene frequencies from generation to generation. For almost
any disease, some people prove to be genetically more resistant than are
others. In an epidemic those people with genes for resistance to that particular
microbe are more likely to survive than are people lacking such genes.
As a result, over the course of history, human populations repeatedly
exposed to a particular pathogen have come to consist of a higher proportion
of individuals with those genes for resistancejust because unfortunate
individuals without the genes were less likely to survive to pass their
genes on to babies.
Fat consolation, you may be thinking again. This evolutionary response
is not one that does the genetically susceptible dying individual any good.
It does mean, though, that a human population as a whole becomes better
protected against the pathogen. Examples of those genetic defenses include
the protections (at a price) that the sickle-cell gene, Tay-Sachs gene, and
cystic fibrosis gene may confer on African blacks, Ashkenazi Jews, and
northern Europeans against malaria, tuberculosis, and bacterial diarrheas,
respectively.
In short, our interaction with most species, as exemplified by hummingbirds,
doesn't make us or the hummingbird "sick." Neither we nor hummingbirds
have had to evolve defenses against each other. That peaceful
relationship was able to persist because hummingbirds don't count on us
to spread their babies or to offer our bodies for food. Hummingbirds
evolved instead to feed on nectar and insects, which they find by using
their own wings.
But microbes evolved to feed on the nutrients within our own bodies,
and they don't have wings to let them reach a new victim's body once the
original victim is dead or resistant. Hence many germs have had to evolve
tricks to let them spread between potential victims, and many of those
tricks are what we experience as "symptoms of disease." We've evolved
countertricks of our own, to which the germs have responded by evolving
counter-countertricks. We and our pathogens are now locked in an escalat202
 GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
ing evolutionary contest, with the death of one contestant the price of
defeat, and with natural selection playing the role of umpire. Now let's
consider the form of the contest: blitzkrieg or guerrilla war?
SUPPOSE THAT ONE counts the number of cases of some particular
infectious disease in some geographic area, and watches how the numbers
change with time. The resulting patterns differ greatly among diseases. For
certain diseases, like malaria or hookworm, new cases appear any month
of any year in an affected area. So-called epidemic diseases, though, produce
no cases for a long time, then a whole wave of cases, then no more
cases again for a while.
Among such epidemic diseases, influenza is one personally familiar to
most Americans, certain years being particularly bad years for us (but
great years for the influenza virus). Cholera epidemics come at longer
intervals, the 1991 Peruvian epidemic being the first one to reach the New
World during the 20th century. Although today's influenza and cholera
epidemics make front-page stories, epidemics used to be far more terrifying
before the rise of modern medicine. The greatest single epidemic in
human history was the one of influenza that killed 21 million people at the
end of the First World War. The Black Death (bubonic plague) killed onequarter
of Europe's population between 1346 and 1352, with death tolls
ranging up to 70 percent in some cities. When the Canadian Pacific Railroad
was being built through Saskatchewan in the early 1880s, that province's
Native Americans, who had previously had little exposure to whites
and their germs, died of tuberculosis at the incredible rate of 9 percent per
year.
The infectious diseases that visit us as epidemics, rather than as a steady
trickle of cases, share several characteristics. First, they spread quickly and
efficiently from an infected person to nearby healthy people, with the
result that the whole population gets exposed within a short time. Second,
they're "acute" illnesses: within a short time, you either die or recover
completely. Third, the fortunate ones of us who do recover develop antibodies
that leave us immune against a recurrence of the disease for a long
time, possibly for the rest of our life. Finally, these diseases tend to be
restricted to humans; the microbes causing them tend not to live in the soil
or in other animals. All four of these traits apply to what Americans think
LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK  203
of as the familiar acute epidemic diseases of childhood, including measles,
rubella, mumps, pertussis, and smallpox.
The reason why the combination of those four traits tends to make a
disease run in epidemics is easy to understand. In simplified form, here's
what happens. The rapid spread of microbes, and the rapid course of
symptoms, mean that everybody in a local human population is quickly
infected and soon thereafter is either dead or else recovered and immune.
No one is left alive who could still be infected. But since the microbe can't
survive except in the bodies of living people, the disease dies out, until a
new crop of babies reaches the susceptible ageand until an infectious
person arrives from the outside to start a new epidemic.
A classic illustration of how such diseases occur as epidemics is the
history of measles on the isolated Atlantic islands called the Faeroes. A
severe epidemic of measles reached the Faeroes in 1781 and then died out,
leaving the islands measles free until an infected carpenter arrived on a
ship from Denmark in 1846. Within three months, almost the whole
Faeroes population (7,782 people) had gotten measles and then either died
or recovered, leaving the measles virus to disappear once again until the
next epidemic. Studies show that measles is likely to die out in any human
population numbering fewer than half a million people. Only in larger
populations can the disease shift from one local area to another, thereby
persisting until enough babies have been born in the originally infected
area that measles can return there.
What's true for measles in the Faeroes is true of our other familiar acute
infectious diseases throughout the world. To sustain themselves, they need
a human population that is sufficiently numerous, and sufficiently densely
packed, that a numerous new crop of susceptible children is available for
infection by the time the disease would otherwise be waning. Hence measles
and similar diseases are also known as crowd diseases.
OBVIOUSLY, CROWD DISEASES could not sustain themselves in small
bands of hunter-gatherers and slash-and-burn farmers. As tragic modern
experience with Amazonian Indians and Pacific Islanders confirms, almost
an entire tribelet may be wiped out by an epidemic brought by an outside
visitorbecause no one in the tribelet had any antibodies against the
microbe. For example, in the winter of 1902 a dysentery epidemic brought
2 0 4  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
by a sailor on the whaling ship Active killed 51 out of the 56 Sadlermiut
Eskimos, a very isolated band of people living on Southampton Island in
the Canadian Arctic. In addition, measles and some of our other "childhood"
diseases are more likely to kill infected adults than children, and all
adults in the tribelet are susceptible. (In contrast, modern Americans rarely
contract measles as adults, because most of them get either measles or the
vaccine against it as children.) Having killed most of the tribelet, the epidemic
then disappears. The small population size of tribelets explains not
only why they can't sustain epidemics introduced from the outside, but
also why they never could evolve epidemic diseases of their own to give
back to visitors.
That's not to say, though, that small human populations are free from
all infectious diseases. They do have infections, but only of certain types.
Some are caused by microbes capable of maintaining themselves in animals
or in the soil, with the result that the disease doesn't die out but
remains constantly available to infect people. For example, the yellow
fever virus is carried by African wild monkeys, whence it can always infect
rural human populations of Africa, whence it was carried by the transatlantic
slave trade to infect New World monkeys and people.
Still other infections of small human populations are chronic diseases
such as leprosy and yaws. Since the disease may take a very long time to
kill its victim, the victim remains alive as a reservoir of microbes to infect
other members of the tribelet. For instance, the Karimui Basim of the New
Guinea highlands, where I worked in the 1960s, was occupied by an isolated
population of a few thousand people, suffering from the world's
highest incidence of leprosyabout 40 percent! Finally, small human populations
are also susceptible to nonfatal infections against which we don't
develop immunity, with the result that the same person can become reinfected
after recovering. That happens with hookworm and many other
parasites.
All these types of diseases, characteristic of small isolated populations,
must be the oldest diseases of humanity. They were the ones we could
evolve and sustain through the early millions of years of our evolutionary
history, when the total human population was tiny and fragmented. These
diseases are also shared with, or similar to the diseases of, our closest wild
relatives, the African great apes. In contrast, the crowd diseases, which we
discussed earlier, could have arisen only with the buildup of large, dense
human populations. That buildup began with the rise of agriculture startLETHAL
GIFT OF LIVESTOCK  205
ing about 10,000 years ago and then accelerated with the rise of cities
starting several thousand years ago. In fact, the first attested dates for
many familiar infectious diseases are surprisingly recent: around 1600 B.c.
for smallpox (as deduced from pockmarks on an Egyptian mummy), 400
B.C. for mumps, 200 B.C. for leprosy, A.D. 1840 for epidemic polio, and
1959 for AIDS.
WHY DID THE rise of agriculture launch the evolution of our crowd
infectious diseases? One reason just mentioned is that agriculture sustains
much higher human population densities than does the hunting-gathering
lifestyleon the average, 10 to 100 times higher. In addition, hunter-gatherers
frequently shift camp and leave behind their own piles of feces with
accumulated microbes and worm larvae. But farmers are sedentary and
live amid their own sewage, thus providing microbes with a short path
from one person's body into another's drinking water.
Some farming populations make it even easier for their own fecal bacteria
and worms to infect new victims, by gathering their feces and urine
and spreading them as fertilizer on the fields where people work. Irrigation
agriculture and fish farming provide ideal living conditions for the snails
carrying schistosomiasis and for flukes that burrow through our skin as
we wade through the feces-laden water. Sedentary farmers become surrounded
not only by their feces but also by disease transmitting rodents,
attracted by the farmers' stored food. The forest clearings made by African
farmers also provide ideal breeding habitats for malaria-transmitting mosquitoes.
If the rise of farming was thus a bonanza for our microbes, the rise of
cities was a greater one, as still more densely packed human populations
festered under even worse sanitation conditions. Not until the beginning
of the 20th century did Europe's urban populations finally become selfsustaining:
before then, constant immigration of healthy peasants from the
countryside was necessary to make up for the constant deaths of city
dwellers from crowd diseases. Another bonanza was the development of
world trade routes, which by Roman times effectively joined the populations
of Europe, Asia, and North Africa into one giant breeding ground
for microbes. That's when smallpox finally reached Rome, as the Plague
of Antoninus, which killed millions of Roman citizens between A.D. 165
and 180.
2 0 6  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Similarly, bubonic plague first appeared in Europe as the Plague of Justinian
(A.D. 542-43). But plague didn't begin to hit Europe with full force
as the Black Death epidemics until A.D. 1346, when a new route for overland
trade with China provided rapid transit, along Eurasia's east-west
axis, for flea-infested furs from plague-ridden areas of Central Asia to
Europe. Today, our jet planes have made even the longest intercontinental
flights briefer than the duration of any human infectious disease. That's
how an Aerolineas Argentinas airplane, stopping in Lima (Peru) in 1991,
managed to deliver dozens of cholera-infected people that same day to my
city of Los Angeles, over 3,000 miles from Lima. The explosive increase
in world travel by Americans, and in immigration to the United States, is
turning us into another melting potthis time, of microbes that we previously
dismissed as just causing exotic diseases in far-off countries.
THUS, WHEN THE human population became sufficiently large and concentrated,
we reached the stage in our history at which we could at last
evolve and sustain crowd diseases confined to our own species. But that
conclusion presents a paradox: such diseases could never have existed
before then! Instead, they had to evolve as new diseases. Where did those
new diseases come from?
Evidence has recently been emerging from molecular studies of the disease-
causing microbes themselves. For many of the microbes responsible
for our unique diseases, molecular biologists can now identify the
microbe's closest relatives. These also prove to be agents of crowd infectious
diseasesbut ones confined to various species of our domestic animals
and pets! Among animals, too, epidemic diseases require large, dense
populations and don't afflict just any animal: they're confined mainly to
social animals providing the necessary large populations. Hence when we
domesticated social animals, such as cows and pigs, they were already
afflicted by epidemic diseases just waiting to be transferred to us.
For example, measles virus is most closely related to the virus causing
rinderpest. That nasty epidemic disease affects cattle and many wild cudchewing
mammals, but not humans. Measles in turn doesn't afflict cattle.
The close similarity of the measles virus to the rinderpest virus suggests
that the latter transferred from cattle to humans and then evolved into the
measles virus by changing its properties to adapt to us. That transfer is not
at all surprising, considering that many peasant farmers live and sleep
LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK  207
close to cows and their feces, urine, breath, sores, and blood. Our intimacy
with cattle has been going on for the 9,000 years since we domesticated
themample time for the rinderpest virus to discover us nearby. As Table
11.1 illustrates, others of our familiar infectious diseases can similarly be
traced back to diseases of our animal friends.
GIVEN OUR PROXIMITY to the animals we love, we must be getting
constantly bombarded by their microbes. Those invaders get winnowed by
natural selection, and only a few of them succeed in establishing themselves
as human diseases. A quick survey of current diseases lets us trace
out four stages in the evolution of a specialized human disease from an
animal precursor.
The first stage is illustrated by dozens of diseases that we now and then
pick up directly from our pets and domestic animals. They include catscratch
fever from our cats, leptospirosis from our dogs, psittacosis from
our chickens and parrots, and brucellosis from our cattle. We're similarly
liable to pick up diseases from wild animals, such as the tularemia that
hunters can get from skinning wild rabbits. All those microbes are still at
an early stage in their evolution into specialized human pathogens. They
still don't get transmitted directly from one person to another, and even
their transfer to us from animals remains uncommon.
In the second stage a former animal pathogen evolves to the point where
it does get transmitted directly between people and causes epidemics.
TABLE I I . I Deadly Gifts from Our Animal Friends
2 0 8  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
However, the epidemic dies out for any of several reasons, such as being
cured by modern medicine, or being stopped when everybody around has
already been infected and either becomes immune or dies. For example, a
previously unknown fever termed O'nyong-nyong fever appeared in East
Africa in 1959 and proceeded to infect several million Africans. It probably
arose from a virus of monkeys and was transmitted to humans by
mosquitoes. The fact that patients recovered quickly and became immune
to further attack helped the new disease die out quickly. Closer to home
for Americans, Fort Bragg fever was the name applied to a new leptospiral
disease that broke out in the United States in the summer of 1942 and
soon disappeared.
A fatal disease vanishing for another reason was New Guinea's laughing
sickness, transmitted by cannibalism and caused by a slow-acting virus
from which no one has ever recovered. Kuru was on its way to exterminating
New Guinea's Fore tribe of 20,000 people, until the establishment of
Australian government control around 1959 ended cannibalism and
thereby the transmission of kuru. The annals of medicine are full of
accounts of diseases that sound like no disease known today, but that once
caused terrifying epidemics and then disappeared as mysteriously as they
had come. The "English sweating sickness," which swept and terrified
Europe between 1485 and 1552, and the "Picardy sweats" of 18th- and
19th-century France, are just two of the many epidemic illnesses that vanished
long before modern medicine had devised methods for identifying
the responsible microbes.
A third stage in the evolution of our major diseases is represented by
former animal pathogens that did establish themselves in humans, that
have not (not yet?) died out, and that may or may not still become major
killers of humanity. The future remains very uncertain for Lassa fever,
caused by a virus derived probably from rodents. Lassa fever was first
observed in 1969 in Nigeria, where it causes a fatal illness so contagious
that Nigerian hospitals have been closed down if even a single case
appears. Better established is Lyme disease, caused by a spirochete that we
get from the bite of ticks carried by mice and deer. Although the first
known human cases in the United States appeared only as recently as
1962, Lyme disease is already reaching epidemic proportions in many
parts of our country. The future of AIDS, derived from monkey viruses
and first documented in humans around 1959, is even more secure (from
the virus's perspective).
LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK  209
The final stage of this evolution is represented by the major, long-established
epidemic diseases confined to humans. These diseases must have
been the evolutionary survivors of far more pathogens that tried to make
the jump to us from animalsand mostly failed.
What is actually going on in those stages, as an exclusive disease of
animals transforms itself into an exclusive disease of humans? One transformation
involves a change of intermediate vector: when a microbe relying
on some arthropod vector for transmission switches to a new host, the
microbe may be forced to find a new arthropod as well. For example,
typhus was initially transmitted between rats by rat fleas, which sufficed
for a while to transfer typhus from rats to humans. Eventually, typhus
microbes discovered that human body lice offered a much more efficient
method of traveling directly between humans. Now that Americans have
mostly deloused themselves, typhus has discovered a new route into us: by
infecting eastern North American flying squirrels and then transferring to
people whose attics harbor flying squirrels.
In short, diseases represent evolution in progress, and microbes adapt
by natural selection to new hosts and vectors. But compared with cows'
bodies, ours offer different immune defenses, lice, feces, and chemistries.
In that new environment, a microbe must evolve new ways to live and to
propagate itself. In several instructive cases doctors or veterinarians have
actually been able to observe microbes evolving those new ways.
The best-studied case involves what happened when myxomatosis hit
Australian rabbits. The myxo virus, native to a wild species of Brazilian
rabbit, had been observed to cause a lethal epidemic in European domestic
rabbits, which are a different species. Hence the virus was intentionally
introduced to Australia in 1950 in the hopes of ridding the continent of its
plague of European rabbits, foolishly introduced in the nineteenth century.
In the first year, myxo produced a gratifying (to Australian farmers) 99.8
percent mortality rate in infected rabbits. Unfortunately for the farmers,
the death rate then dropped in the second year to 90 percent and eventually
to 25 percent, frustrating hopes of eradicating rabbits completely from
Australia. The problem was that the myxo virus evolved to serve its own
interests, which differed from ours as well as from those of the rabbits.
The virus changed so as to kill fewer rabbits and to permit lethally infected
ones to live longer before dying. As a result, a less lethal myxo virus
spreads baby viruses to more rabbits than did the original, highly virulent
myxo.
210  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
For a similar example in humans, we have only to consider the surprising
evolution of syphilis. Today, our two immediate associations to syphilis
are genital sores and a very slowly developing disease, leading to the death
of many untreated victims only after many years. However, when syphilis
was first definitely recorded in Europe in 1495, its pustules often covered
the body from the head to the knees, caused flesh to fall off people's faces,
and led to death within a few months. By 1546, syphilis had evolved into
the disease with the symptoms so well known to us today. Apparently, just
as with myxomatosis, those syphilis spirochetes that evolved so as to keep
their victims alive for longer were thereby able to transmit their spirochete
offspring into more victims.
THE IMPORTANCE OF lethal microbes in human history is well illustrated
by Europeans' conquest and depopulation of the New World. Far
more Native Americans died in bed from Eurasian germs than on the battlefield
from European guns and swords. Those germs undermined Indian
resistance by killing most Indians and their leaders and by sapping the
survivors' morale. For instance, in 1519 Cortes landed on the coast of
Mexico with 600 Spaniards, to conquer the fiercely militaristic Aztec
Empire with a population of many millions. That Cortes reached the Aztec
capital of Tenochtitlan, escaped with the loss of "only" two-thirds of his
force, and managed to fight his way back to the coast demonstrates both
Spanish military advantages and the initial naivete of the Aztecs. But when
Cortes's next onslaught came, the Aztecs were no longer naive and fought
street by street with the utmost tenacity. What gave the Spaniards a decisive
advantage was smallpox, which reached Mexico in 1520 with one
infected slave arriving from Spanish Cuba. The resulting epidemic proceeded
to kill nearly half of the Aztecs, including Emperor Cuitlahuac.
Aztec survivors were demoralized by the mysterious illness that killed Indians
and spared Spaniards, as if advertising the Spaniards' invincibility. By
1618, Mexico's initial population of about 20 million had plummeted to
about 1.6 million.
Pizarro had similarly grim luck when he landed on the coast of Peru in
1531 with 168 men to conquer the Inca Empire of millions. Fortunately
for Pizarro and unfortunately for the Incas, smallpox had arrived overland
around 1526, killing much of the Inca population, including both the
emperor Huayna Capac and his designated successor. As we saw in ChapLETHAL
GIFT OF LIVESTOCK  211
ter 3, the result of the throne's being left vacant was that two other sons
of Huayna Capac, Atahuallpa and Huascar, became embroiled in a civil
war that Pizarro exploited to conquer the divided Incas.
When we in the United States think of the most populous New World
societies existing in 1492, only those of the Aztecs and the Incas tend to
come to our minds. We forget that North America also supported populous
Indian societies in the most logical place, the Mississippi Valley, which
contains some of our best farmland today. In that case, however, conquis
tadores contributed nothing directly to the societies' destruction; Eurasian
germs, spreading in advance, did everything. When Hernando de Soto
became the first European conquistador to march through the southeastern
United States, in 1540, he came across Indian town sites abandoned
two years earlier because the inhabitants had died in epidemics. These epidemics
had been transmitted from coastal Indians infected by Spaniards
visiting the coast. The Spaniards' microbes spread to the interior in
advance of the Spaniards themselves.
De Soto was still able to see some of the densely populated Indian towns
lining the lower Mississippi. After the end of his expedition, it was a long
time before Europeans again reached the Mississippi Valley, but Eurasian
microbes were now established in North America and kept spreading. By
the time of the next appearance of Europeans on the lower Mississippi,
that of French settlers in the late 1600s, almost all of those big Indian
towns had vanished. Their relics are the great mound sites of the Mississippi
Valley. Only recently have we come to realize that many of the
mound-building societies were still largely intact when Columbus reached
the New World, and that they collapsed (probably as a result of disease)
between 1492 and the systematic European exploration of the Mississippi.
When I was young, American schoolchildren were taught that North
America had originally been occupied by only about one million Indians.
That low number was useful in justifying the white conquest of what could
be viewed as an almost empty continent. However, archaeological excavations,
and scrutiny of descriptions left by the very first European explorers
on our coasts, now suggest an initial number of around 20 million Indians.
For the New World as a whole, the Indian population decline in the century
or two following Columbus's arrival is estimated to have been as large
as 95 percent.
The main killers were Old World germs to which Indians had never
been exposed, and against which they therefore had neither immune nor
2 I 2  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
genetic resistance. Smallpox, measles, influenza, and typhus competed for
top rank among the killers. As if these had not been enough, diphtheria,
malaria, mumps, pertussis, plague, tuberculosis, and yellow fever came up
close behind. In countless cases, whites were actually there to witness the
destruction occurring when the germs arrived. For example, in 1837 the
Mandan Indian tribe, with one of the most elaborate cultures in our Great
Plains, contracted smallpox from a steamboat traveling up the Missouri
River from St. Louis. The population of one Mandan village plummeted
from 2,000 to fewer than 40 within a few weeks.
WHILE OVER A dozen major infectious diseases of Old World origins
became established in the New World, perhaps not a single major killer
reached Europe from the Americas. The sole possible exception is syphilis,
whose area of origin remains controversial. The one-sidedness of that
exchange of germs becomes even more striking when we recall that large,
dense human populations are a prerequisite for the evolution of our crowd
infectious diseases. If recent reappraisals of the pre-Columbian New World
population are correct, it was not far below the contemporary population
of Eurasia. Some New World cities like Tenochtitlan were among the
world's most populous cities at the time. Why didn't Tenochtitlan have
awful germs waiting for the Spaniards?
One possible contributing factor is that the rise of dense human populations
began somewhat later in the New World than in the Old World.
Another is that the three most densely populated American centersthe
Andes, Mesoamerica, and the Mississippi Valleynever became connected
by regular fast trade into one huge breeding ground for microbes, in the
way that Europe, North Africa, India, and China became linked in Roman
times. Those factors still don't explain, though, why the New World
apparently ended up with no lethal crowd epidemics at all. (Tuberculosis
DNA has been reported from the mummy of a Peruvian Indian who died
1,000 years ago, but the identification procedure used did not distinguish
human tuberculosis from a closely related pathogen (Mycobacterium
bovis) that is widespread in wild animals.)
Instead, what must be the main reason for the failure of lethal crowd
epidemics to arise in the Americas becomes clear when we pause to ask a
simple question. From what microbes could they conceivably have
evolved? We've seen that Eurasian crowd diseases evolved out of diseases
LETHAL GIFT OF LIVESTOCK  2 1 3
of Eurasian herd animals that became domesticated. Whereas many such
animals existed in Eurasia, only five animals of any sort became domesticated
in the Americas: the turkey in Mexico and the U.S. Southwest, the
llama / alpaca and the guinea pig in the Andes, the Muscovy duck in tropical
South America, and the dog throughout the Americas.
In turn, we also saw that this extreme paucity of domestic animals in
the New World reflects the paucity of wild starting material. About 80
percent of the big wild mammals of the Americas became extinct at the
end of the last Ice Age, around 13,000 years ago. The few domesticates
that remained to Native Americans were not likely sources of crowd diseases,
compared with cows and pigs. Muscovy ducks and turkeys don't
live in enormous flocks, and they're not cuddly species (like young lambs)
with which we have much physical contact. Guinea pigs may have contributed
a trypanosome infection like Chagas' disease or leishmaniasis to our
catalog of woes, but that's uncertain. Initially, most surprising is the
absence of any human disease derived from llamas (or alpacas), which it's
tempting to consider the Andean equivalent of Eurasian livestock. However,
llamas had four strikes against them as a source of human pathogens:
they were kept in smaller herds than were sheep and goats and pigs; their
total numbers were never remotely as large as those of the Eurasian populations
of domestic livestock, since llamas never spread beyond the Andes;
people don't drink (and get infected by) llama milk; and llamas aren't kept
indoors, in close association with people. In contrast, human mothers in
the New Guinea highlands often nurse piglets, and pigs as well as cows
are frequently kept inside the huts of peasant farmers.
THE HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE of animal-derived diseases extends far
beyond the collision of the Old and the New Worlds. Eurasian germs
played a key role in decimating native peoples in many other parts of the
world, including Pacific islanders, Aboriginal Australians, and the Khoisan
peoples (Hottentots and Bushmen) of southern Africa. Cumulative mortalities
of these previously unexposed peoples from Eurasian germs ranged
from 50 percent to 100 percent. For instance, the Indian population of
Hispaniola declined from around 8 million, when Columbus arrived in
A.D. 1492, to zero by 1535. Measles reached Fiji with a Fijian chief
returning from a visit to Australia in 1875, and proceeded to kill about
one-quarter of all Fijians then alive (after most Fijians had already been
214 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
killed by epidemics beginning with the first European visit, in 1791). Syphilis,
gonorrhea, tuberculosis, and influenza arriving with Captain Cook in
1779, followed by a big typhoid epidemic in 1804 and numerous "minor"
epidemics, reduced Hawaii's population from around half a million in
1779 to 84,000 in 1853, the year when smallpox finally reached Hawaii
and killed around 10,000 of the survivors. These examples could be
multiplied almost indefinitely.
However, germs did not act solely to Europeans' advantage. While the
New World and Australia did not harbor native epidemic diseases
awaiting Europeans, tropical Asia, Africa, Indonesia, and New Guinea certainly
did. Malaria throughout the tropical Old World, cholera in tropical
Southeast Asia, and yellow fever in tropical Africa were (and still are) the
most notorious of the tropical killers. They posed the most serious obstacle
to European colonization of the tropics, and they explain why the European
colonial partitioning of New Guinea and most of Africa was not
accomplished until nearly 400 years after European partitioning of the
New World began. Furthermore, once malaria and yellow fever did
become transmitted to the Americas by European ship traffic, they
emerged as the major impediment to colonization of the New World tropics
as well. A familiar example is the role of those two diseases in aborting
the French effort, and nearly aborting the ultimately successful American
effort, to construct the Panama Canal.
Bearing all these facts in mind, let's try to regain our sense of perspective
about the role of germs in answering Yali's question. There is no doubt
that Europeans developed a big advantage in weaponry, technology, and
political organization over most of the non-European peoples that they
conquered. But that advantage alone doesn't fully explain how initially so
few European immigrants came to supplant so much of the native population
of the Americas and some other parts of the world. That might not
have happened without Europe's sinister gift to other continentsthe
germs evolving from Eurasians' long intimacy with domestic animals.

276  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
lineages was from those where the political unit was a single autonomous
village, to those consisting of a regional assemblage of villages in which
the largest village with a paramount chief controlled the smaller villages
with lesser chiefs.
BY NOW, IT should be obvious that chiefdoms introduced the dilemma
fundamental to all centrally governed, nonegalitarian societies. At best,
they do good by providing expensive services impossible to contract for on
an individual basis. At worst, they function unabashedly as kleptocracies,
transferring net wealth from commoners to upper classes. These noble and
selfish functions are inextricably linked, although some governments
emphasize much more of one function than of the other. The difference
between a kleptocrat and a wise statesman, between a robber baron and a
public benefactor, is merely one of degree: a matter of just how large a
percentage of the tribute extracted from producers is retained by the elite,
and how much the commoners like the public uses to which the redistributed
tribute is put. We consider President Mobutu of Zaire a kleptocrat
because he keeps too much tribute (the equivalent of billions of dollars)
and redistributes too little tribute (no functioning telephone system in
Zaire). We consider George Washington a statesman because he spent tax
money on widely admired programs and did not enrich himself as president.
Nevertheless, George Washington was born into wealth, which is
much more unequally distributed in the United States than in New Guinea
villages.
For any ranked society, whether a chiefdom or a state, one thus has to
ask: why do the commoners tolerate the transfer of the fruits of their hard
labor to kleptocrats? This question, raised by political theorists from Plato
to Marx, is raised anew by voters in every modern election. Kleptocracies
with little public support run the risk of being overthrown, either by
downtrodden commoners or by upstart would-be replacement kleptocrats
seeking public support by promising a higher ratio of services rendered to
fruits stolen. For example, Hawaiian history was repeatedly punctuated
by revolts against repressive chiefs, usually led by younger brothers promising
less oppression. This may sound funny to us in the context of old
Hawaii, until we reflect on all the misery still being caused by such struggles
in the modern world.
What should an elite do to gain popular support while still maintaining
FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY  2 7 7
a more comfortable lifestyle than commoners? Kleptocrats throughout the
ages have resorted to a mixture of four solutions:
1. Disarm the populace, and arm the elite. That's much easier in these
days of high-tech weaponry, produced only in industrial plants and easily
monopolized by an elite, than in ancient times of spears and clubs easily
made at home.
2. Make the masses happy by redistributing much of the tribute
received, in popular ways. This principle was as valid for Hawaiian chiefs
as it is for American politicians today.
3. Use the monopoly of force to promote happiness, by maintaining
public order and curbing violence. This is potentially a big and underappreciated
advantage of centralized societies over noncentralized ones.
Anthropologists formerly idealized band and tribal societies as gentle and
nonviolent, because visiting anthropologists observed no murder in a band
of 25 people in the course of a three-year study. Of course they didn't: it's
easy to calculate that a band of a dozen adults and a dozen children, sub
ject to the inevitable deaths occurring anyway for the usual reasons other
than murder, could not perpetuate itself if in addition one of its dozen
adults murdered another adult every three years. Much more extensive
long-term information about band and tribal societies reveals that murder
is a leading cause of death. For example, I happened to be visiting New
Guinea's Iyau people at a time when a woman anthropologist was interviewing
Iyau women about their life histories. Woman after woman, when
asked to name her husband, named several sequential husbands who had
died violent deaths. A typical answer went like this: "My first husband
was killed by Elopi raiders. My second husband was killed by a man who
wanted me, and who became my third husband. That husband was killed
by the brother of my second husband, seeking to avenge his murder." Such
biographies prove common for so-called gentle tribespeople and contributed
to the acceptance of centralized authority as tribal societies grew
larger.
4. The remaining way for kleptocrats to gain public support is to construct
an ideology or religion justifying kleptocracy. Bands and tribes
already had supernatural beliefs, just as do modern established religions,
But the supernatural beliefs of bands and tribes did not serve to justify
central authority, justify transfer of wealth, or maintain peace between
unrelated individuals. When supernatural beliefs gained those functions
and became institutionalized, they were thereby transformed into what we
2 7 8  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
term a religion. Hawaiian chiefs were typical of chiefs elsewhere, in
asserting divinity, divine descent, or at least a hotline to the gods. The chief
claimed to serve the people by interceding for them with the gods and
reciting the ritual formulas required to obtain rain, good harvests, and
success in fishing.
Chiefdoms characteristically have an ideology, precursor to an institutionalized
religion, that buttresses the chief's authority. The chief may
either combine the offices of political leader and priest in a single person,
or may support a separate group of kleptocrats (that is, priests) whose
function is to provide ideological justification for the chiefs. That is why
chiefdoms devote so much collected tribute to constructing temples and
other public works, which serve as centers of the official religion and visible
signs of the chief's power.
Besides justifying the transfer of wealth to kleptocrats, institutionalized
religion brings two other important benefits to centralized societies. First,
shared ideology or religion helps solve the problem of how unrelated individuals
are to live together without killing each otherby providing them
with a bond not based on kinship. Second, it gives people a motive, other
than genetic self-interest, for sacrificing their lives on behalf of others. At
the cost of a few society members who die in battle as soldiers, the whole
society becomes much more effective at conquering other societies or
resisting attacks.
THE POLITICAL, ECONOMIC, and social institutions most familiar to
us today are those of states, which now rule all of the world's land area
except for Antarctica. Many early states and all modern ones have had
literate elites, and many modern states have literate masses as well. Vanished
states tended to leave visible archaeological hallmarks, such as ruins
of temples with standardized designs, at least four levels of settlement
sizes, and pottery styles covering tens of thousands of square miles. We
thereby know that states arose around 3700 B.c. in Mesopotamia and
around 300 B.C. in Mesoamerica, over 2,000 years ago in the Andes,
China, and Southeast Asia, and over 1,000 years ago in West Africa. In
modern times the formation of states out of chiefdoms has been observed
repeatedly. Thus, we possess much more information about past states and
their formation than about past chiefdoms, tribes, and bands.
Protostates extend many features of large paramount (multivillage)
FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY  2 7 9
chiefdoms. They continue the increase in size from bands to tribes to chiefdoms.
Whereas chiefdoms' populations range from a few thousand to a
few tens of thousands, the populations of most modern states exceed one
million, and China's exceeds one billion. The paramount chief's location
may become the state's capital city. Other population centers of states outside
the capital may also qualify as true cities, which are lacking in chiefdoms.
Cities differ from villages in their monumental public works,
palaces of rulers, accumulation of capital from tribute or taxes, and concentration
of people other than food producers.
Early states had a hereditary leader with a title equivalent to king, like
a super paramount chief and exercising an even greater monopoly of information,
decision making, and power. Even in democracies today, crucial
knowledge is available to only a few individuals, who control the flow of
information to the rest of the government and consequently control decisions.
For instance, in the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1963, information and
discussions that determined whether nuclear war would engulf half a billion
people were initially confined by President Kennedy to a ten-member
executive committee of the National Security Council that he himself
appointed; then he limited final decisions to a four-member group consisting
of himself and three of his cabinet ministers.
Central control is more far-reaching, and economic redistribution in the
form of tribute (renamed taxes) more extensive, in states than in chiefdoms.
Economic specialization is more extreme, to the point where today
not even farmers remain self-sufficient. Hence the effect on society is catastrophic
when state government collapses, as happened in Britain upon the
removal of Roman troops, administrators, and coinage between A.D. 407
and 411. Even the earliest Mesopotamian states exercised centralized control
of their economies. Their food was produced by four specialist groups
(cereal farmers, herders, fishermen, and orchard and garden growers),
from each of which the state took the produce and to each of which it gave
out the necessary supplies, tools, and foods other than the type of food
that this group produced. The state supplied seeds and plow animals to
the cereal farmers, took wool from the herders, exchanged the wool by
long-distance trade for metal and other essential raw materials, and paid
out food rations to the laborers who maintained the irrigation systems on
which the farmers depended.
Many, perhaps most, early states adopted slavery on a much larger scale
than did chiefdoms. That was not because chiefdoms were more kindly
280  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
disposed toward defeated enemies but because the greater economic specialization
of states, with more mass production and more public works,
provided more uses for slave labor. In addition, the larger scale of state
warfare made more captives available.
A chiefdom's one or two levels of administration are greatly multiplied
in states, as anyone who has seen an organizational chart of any government
knows. Along with the proliferation of vertical levels of bureaucrats,
there is also horizontal specialization. Instead of konohiki carrying out
every aspect of administration for a Hawaiian district, state governments
have several separate departments, each with its own hierarchy, to handle
water management, taxes, military draft, and so on. Even small states have
more complex bureaucracies than large chiefdoms. For instance, the West
African state of Maradi had a central administration with over 130 titled
offices.
Internal conflict resolution within states has become increasingly formalized
by laws, a judiciary, and police. The laws are often written,
because many states (with conspicuous exceptions, such as that of the
Incas) have had literate elites, writing having been developed around the
same time as the formation of the earliest states in both Mesopotamia and
Mesoamerica. In contrast, no early chiefdom not on the verge of statehood
developed writing.
Early states had state religions and standardized temples. Many early
kings were considered divine and were accorded special treatment in innumerable
respects. For example, the Aztec and Inca emperors were both
carried about in litters; servants went ahead of the Inca emperor's litter
and swept the ground clear; and the Japanese language includes special
forms of the pronoun "you" for use only in addressing the emperor. Early
kings were themselves the head of the state religion or else had separate
high priests. The Mesopotamian temple was the center not only of religion
but also of economic redistribution, writing, and crafts technology.
All these features of states carry to an extreme the developments that
led from tribes to chiefdoms. In addition, though, states have diverged
from chiefdoms in several new directions. The most fundamental such distinction
is that states are organized on political and territorial lines, not on
the kinship lines that defined bands, tribes, and simple chiefdoms. Furthermore,
bands and tribes always, and chiefdoms usually, consist of a single
ethnic and linguistic group. States, thoughespecially so-called empires
FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY  2 8 I
formed by amalgamation or conquest of statesare regularly multiethnic
and multilingual. State bureaucrats are not selected mainly on the basis of
kinship, as in chiefdoms, but are professionals selected at least partly on
the basis of training and ability. In later states, including most today, the
leadership often became nonhereditary, and many states abandoned the
entire system of formal hereditary classes carried over from chiefdoms.
OVER THE PAST 13,000 years the predominant trend in human society
has been the replacement of smaller, less complex units by larger, more
complex ones. Obviously, that is no more than an average long-term trend,
with innumerable shifts in either direction: 1,000 amalgamations for 999
reversals. We know from our daily newspaper that large units (for
instance, the former USSR, Yugoslavia, and Czechoslovakia) can disintegrate
into smaller units, as did Alexander of Macedon's empire over 2,000
years ago. More complex units don't always conquer less complex ones
but may succumb to them, as when the Roman and Chinese Empires were
overrun by "barbarian" and Mongol chiefdoms, respectively. But the longterm
trend has still been toward large, complex societies, culminating in
states.
Obviously, too, part of the reason for states' triumphs over simpler entities
when the two collide is that states usually enjoy an advantage of weaponry
and other technology, and a large numerical advantage in population.
But there are also two other potential advantages inherent in chiefdoms
and states. First, a centralized decision maker has the advantage at concentrating
troops and resources. Second, the official religions and patriotic
fervor of many states make their troops willing to fight suicidally.
The latter willingness is one so strongly programmed into us citizens of
modern states, by our schools and churches and governments, that we
forget what a radical break it marks with previous human history. Every
state has its slogan urging its citizens to be prepared to die if necessary for
the state: Britain's "For King and Country," Spain's "Por Dios y Espana,"
and so on. Similar sentiments motivated 16th-century Aztec warriors:
"There is nothing like death in war, nothing like the flowery death so
precious to Him [the Aztec national god Huitzilopochtli] who gives life:
far off I see it, my heart yearns for it!"
Such sentiments are unthinkable in bands and tribes. In all the accounts
282  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
that my New Guinea friends have given me of their former tribal wars,
there has been not a single hint of tribal patriotism, of a suicidal charge,
or of any other military conduct carrying an accepted risk of being killed.
Instead, raids are initiated by ambush or by superior force, so as to minimize
at all costs the risk that one might die for one's village. But that
attitude severely limits the military options of tribes, compared with state
societies. Naturally, what makes patriotic and religious fanatics such dangerous
opponents is not the deaths of the fanatics themselves, but their
willingness to accept the deaths of a fraction of their number in order to
annihilate or crush their infidel enemy. Fanaticism in war, of the type that
drove recorded Christian and Islamic conquests, was probably unknown
on Earth until chiefdoms and especially states emerged within the last
6,000 years.
How DID SMALL, noncentralized, kin-based societies evolve into large
centralized ones in which most members are not closely related to each
other? Having reviewed the stages in this transformation from bands to
states, we now ask what impelled societies thus to transform themselves.
At many moments in history, states have arisen independentlyor, as
cultural anthropologists say, "pristinely," that is, in the absence of any
preexisting surrounding states. Pristine state origins took place at least
once, possibly many times, on each of the continents except Australia and
North America. Prehistoric states included those of Mesopotamia, North
China, the Nile and Indus Valleys, Mesoamerica, the Andes, and West
Africa. Native states in contact with European states have arisen from
chiefdoms repeatedly in the last three centuries in Madagascar, Hawaii,
Tahiti, and many parts of Africa. Chiefdoms have arisen pristinely even
more often, in all of the same regions and in North America's Southeast
and Pacific Northwest, the Amazon, Polynesia, and sub-Saharan Africa.
All these origins of complex societies give us a rich database for understanding
their development.
Of the many theories addressing the problem of state origins, the simplest
denies that there is any problem to solve. Aristotle considered states
the natural condition of human society, requiring no explanation. His
error was understandable, because all the societies with which he would
have been acquaintedGreek societies of the fourth century B.C.were
FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY  283
states. However, we now know that, as of A.D. 1492, much of the world
was instead organized into chiefdoms, tribes, or bands. State formation
does demand an explanation.
The next theory is the most familiar one. The French philosopher Jean-
Jacques Rousseau speculated that states are formed by a social contract, a
rational decision reached when people calculated their self-interest, came
to the agreement that they would be better off in a state than in simpler
societies, and voluntarily did away with their simpler societies. But observation
and historical records have failed to uncover a single case of a state's
being formed in that ethereal atmosphere of dispassionate farsightedness.
Smaller units do not voluntarily abandon their sovereignty and merge into
larger units. They do so only by conquest, or under external duress.
A third theory, still popular with some historians and economists, sets
out from the undoubted fact that, in both Mesopotamia and North China
and Mexico, large-scale irrigation systems began to be constructed around
the time that states started to emerge. The theory also notes that any big,
complex system for irrigation or hydraulic management requires a centralized
bureaucracy to construct and maintain it. The theory then turns an
observed rough correlation in time into a postulated chain of cause and
effect. Supposedly, Mesopotamians and North Chinese and Mexicans
foresaw the advantages that a large-scale irrigation system would bring
them, even though there was at the time no such system within thousands
of miles (or anywhere on Earth) to illustrate for them those advantages.
Those farsighted people chose to merge their inefficient little chiefdoms
into a larger state capable of blessing them with large-scale irrigation.
However, this "hydraulic theory" of state formation is subject to the
same objections leveled against social contract theories in general. More
specifically, it addresses only the final stage in the evolution of complex
societies. It says nothing about what drove the progression from bands to
tribes to chiefdoms during all the millennia before the prospect of largescale
irrigation loomed up on the horizon. When historical or archaeological
dates are examined in detail, they fail to support the view of irrigation
as the driving force for state formation. In Mesopotamia, North China,
Mexico, and Madagascar, small-scale irrigation systems already existed
before the rise of states. Construction of large-scale irrigation systems did
not accompany the emergence of states but came only significantly later in
each of those areas. In most of the states formed over the Maya area of
284 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Mesoamerica and the Andes, irrigation systems always remained smallscale
ones that local communities could build and maintain themselves.
Thus, even in those areas where complex systems of hydraulic management
did emerge, they were a secondary consequence of states that must
have formed for other reasons.
What seems to me to point to a fundamentally correct view of state
formation is an undoubted fact of much wider validity than the correlation
between irrigation and the formation of some statesnamely, that the size
of the regional population is the strongest single predictor of societal complexity.
As we have seen, bands number a few dozen individuals, tribes a
few hundred, chiefdoms a few thousand to a few tens of thousands, and
states generally over about 50,000. In addition to that coarse correlation
between regional population size and type of society (band, tribe, and so
on), there is a finer trend, within each of those categories, between population
and societal complexity: for instance, that chiefdoms with large populations
prove to be the most centralized, stratified, and complex ones.
These correlations suggest strongly that regional population size or
population density or population pressure has something to do with the
formation of complex societies. But the correlations do not tell us precisely
how population variables function in a chain of cause and effect whose
outcome is a complex society. To trace out that chain, let us now remind
ourselves how large dense populations themselves arise. Then we can
examine why a large but simple society could not maintain itself. With
that as background, we shall finally return to the question of how a simpler
society actually becomes more complex as the regional population
increases.
WE HAVE SEEN that large or dense populations arise only under conditions
of food production, or at least under exceptionally productive conditions
for hunting-gathering. Some productive hunter-gatherer societies
reached the organizational level of chiefdoms, but none reached the level
of states: all states nourish their citizens by food production. These considerations,
along with the just mentioned correlation between regional population
size and societal complexity, have led to a protracted chicken-oregg
debate about the causal relations between food production, population
variables, and societal complexity. Is it intensive food production that
is the cause, triggering population growth and somehow leading to a comFROM
EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY  2 8 5
plex society? Or are large populations and complex societies instead the
cause, somehow leading to intensification of food production?
Posing the question in that either-or form misses the point. Intensified
food production and societal complexity stimulate each other, by autoca
talysis. That is, population growth leads to societal complexity, by mechanisms
that we shall discuss, while societal complexity in turn leads to
intensified food production and thereby to population growth. Complex
centralized societies are uniquely capable of organizing public works
(including irrigation systems), long-distance trade (including the importation
of metals to make better agricultural tools), and activities of different
groups of economic specialists (such as feeding herders with farmers'
cereal, and transferring the herders' livestock to farmers for use as plow
animals). All of these capabilities of centralized societies have fostered
intensified food production and hence population growth throughout history.
In addition, food production contributes in at least three ways to specific
features of complex societies. First, it involves seasonally pulsed
inputs of labor. When the harvest has been stored, the farmers' labor
becomes available for a centralized political authority to harnessin order
to build public works advertising state power (such as the Egyptian pyramids),
or to build public works that could feed more mouths (such as
Polynesian Hawaii's irrigation systems or fishponds), or to undertake wars
of conquest to form larger political entities.
Second, food production may be organized so as to generate stored food
surpluses, which permit economic specialization and social stratification.
The surpluses can be used to feed all tiers of a complex society: the chiefs,
bureaucrats, and other members of the elite; the scribes, craftspeople, and
other non-food-producing specialists; and the farmers themselves, during
times that they are drafted to construct public works.
Finally, food production permits or requires people to adopt sedentary
living, which is a prerequisite for accumulating substantial possessions,
developing elaborate technology and crafts, and constructing public
works. The importance of fixed residence to a complex society explains
why missionaries and governments, whenever they make first contact with
previously uncontacted nomadic tribes or bands in New Guinea or the
Amazon, universally have two immediate goals. One goal, of course, is the
obvious one of "pacifying" the nomads: that is, dissuading them from
killing missionaries, bureaucrats, or each other. The other goal is to induce
286  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
the nomads to settle in villages, so that the missionaries and bureaucrats
can find the nomads, bring them services such as medical care and schools,
and proselytize and control them.
THUS, FOOD PRODUCTION, which increases population size, also acts
in many ways to make features of complex societies possible. But that
doesn't prove that food production and large populations make complex
societies inevitable. How can we account for the empirical observation
that band or tribal organization just does not work for societies of hundreds
of thousands of people, and that all existing large societies have
complex centralized organization? We can cite at least four obvious reasons.
One reason is the problem of conflict between unrelated strangers. That
problem grows astronomically as the number of people making up the
society increases. Relationships within a band of 20 people involve only
190 two-person interactions (20 people times 19 divided by 2), but a band
of 2,000 would have 1,999,000 dyads. Each of those dyads represents a
potential time bomb that could explode in a murderous argument. Each
murder in band and tribal societies usually leads to an attempted revenge
killing, starting one more unending cycle of murder and countermurder
that destabilizes the society.
In a band, where everyone is closely related to everyone else, people
related simultaneously to both quarreling parties step in to mediate quarrels.
In a tribe, where many people are still close relatives and everyone at
least knows everybody else by name, mutual relatives and mutual friends
mediate the quarrel. But once the threshold of "several hundred," below
which everyone can know everyone else, has been crossed, increasing numbers
of dyads become pairs of unrelated strangers. When strangers fight,
few people present will be friends or relatives of both combatants, with
self-interest in stopping the fight. Instead, many onlookers will be friends
or relatives of only one combatant and will side with that person, escalating
the two-person fight into a general brawl. Hence a large society that
continues to leave conflict resolution to all of its members is guaranteed to
blow up. That factor alone would explain why societies of thousands can
exist only if they develop centralized authority to monopolize force and
resolve conflicts.
A second reason is the growing impossibility of communal decision
FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY " 2 8 7
making with increasing population size. Decision making by the entire
adult population is still possible in New Guinea villages small enough that
news and information quickly spread to everyone, that everyone can hear
everyone else in a meeting of the whole village, and that everyone who
wants to speak at the meeting has the opportunity to do so. But all those
prerequisites for communal decision making become unattainable in much
larger communities. Even now, in these days of microphones and loudspeakers,
we all know that a group meeting is no way to resolve issues for
a group of thousands of people. Hence a large society must be structured
and centralized if it is to reach decisions effectively.
A third reason involves economic considerations. Any society requires
means to transfer goods between its members. One individual may happen
to acquire more of some essential commodity on one day and less on
another. Because individuals have different talents, one individual consistently
tends to wind up with an excess of some essentials and a deficit of
others. In small societies with few pairs of members, the resulting necessary
transfers of goods can be arranged directly between pairs of individuals
or families, by reciprocal exchanges. But the same mathematics that
makes direct pairwise conflict resolution inefficient in large societies makes
direct pairwise economic transfers also inefficient. Large societies can
function economically only if they have a redistributive economy in addition
to a reciprocal economy. Goods in excess of an individual's needs
must be transferred from the individual to a centralized authority, which
then redistributes the goods to individuals with deficits.
A final consideration mandating complex organization for large societies
has to do with population densities. Large societies of food producers
have not only more members but also higher population densities than do
small bands of hunter-gatherers. Each band of a few dozen hunters occupies
a large territory, within which they can acquire most of the resources
essential to them. They can obtain their remaining necessities by trading
with neighboring bands during intervals between band warfare. As population
density increases, the territory of that band-sized population of a
few dozen would shrink to a small area, with more and more of life's
necessities having to be obtained outside the area. For instance, one
couldn't just divide Holland's 16,000 square miles and 16,000,000 people
into 800,000 individual territories, each encompassing 13 acres and serving
as home to an autonomous band of 20 people who remained selfsufficient
confined within their 13 acres, occasionally taking advantage of
288  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
a temporary truce to come to the borders of their tiny territory in order to
exchange some trade items and brides with the next band. Such spatial
realities require that densely populated regions support large and complexly
organized societies.
Considerations of conflict resolution, decision making, economics, and
space thus converge in requiring large societies to be centralized. But centralization
of power inevitably opens the doorfor those who hold the
power, are privy to information, make the decisions, and redistribute the
goodsto exploit the resulting opportunities to reward themselves and
their relatives. To anyone familiar with any modern grouping of people,
that's obvious. As early societies developed, those acquiring centralized
power gradually established themselves as an elite, perhaps originating as
one of several formerly equal-ranked village clans that became "more
equal" than the others.
THOSE ARE THE reasons why large societies cannot function with band
organization and instead are complex kleptocracies. But we are still left
with the question of how small, simple societies actually evolve or amalgamate
into large, complex ones. Amalgamation, centralized conflict resolution,
decision making, economic redistribution, and kleptocratic religion
don't just develop automatically through a Rousseauesque social contract.
What drives the amalgamation?
In part, the answer depends upon evolutionary reasoning. I said at the
outset of this chapter that societies classified in the same category are not
all identical to each other, because humans and human groups are infinitely
diverse. For example, among bands and tribes, the big-men of some
are inevitably more charismatic, powerful, and skilled in reaching decisions
than the big-men of others. Among large tribes, those with stronger
big-men and hence greater centralization tend to have an advantage over
those with less centralization. Tribes that resolve conflicts as poorly as did
the Fayu tend to blow apart again into bands, while ill-governed chiefdoms
blow apart into smaller chiefdoms or tribes. Societies with effective
conflict resolution, sound decision making, and harmonious economic
redistribution can develop better technology, concentrate their military
power, seize larger and more productive territories, and crush autonomous
smaller societies one by one.
Thus, competition between societies at one level of complexity tends to
FROM EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY  289
lead to societies on the next level of complexity if conditions permit. Tribes
conquer or combine with tribes to reach the size of chiefdoms, which conquer
or combine with other chiefdoms to reach the size of states, which
conquer or combine with other states to become empires. More generally,
large units potentially enjoy an advantage over individual small units if
and that's a big "if"the large units can solve the problems that come
with their larger size, such as perennial threats from upstart claimants to
leadership, commoner resentment of kleptocracy, and increased problems
associated with economic integration.
The amalgamation of smaller units into larger ones has often been documented
historically or archaeologically. Contrary to Rousseau, such
amalgamations never occur by a process of unthreatened little societies
freely deciding to merge, in order to promote the happiness of their citizens.
Leaders of little societies, as of big ones, are jealous of their independence
and prerogatives. Amalgamation occurs instead in either of two
ways: by merger under the threat of external force, or by actual conquest.
Innumerable examples are available to illustrate each mode of amalgamation.
Merger under the threat of external force is well illustrated by the formation
of the Cherokee Indian confederation in the U.S. Southeast. The
Cherokees were originally divided into 30 or 40 independent chiefdoms,
each consisting of a village of about 400 people. Increasing white settlement
led to conflicts between Cherokees and whites. When individual
Cherokees robbed or assaulted white settlers and traders, the whites were
unable to discriminate among the different Cherokee chiefdoms and retaliated
indiscriminately against any Cherokees, either by military action or
by cutting off trade. In response, the Cherokee chiefdoms gradually found
themselves compelled to join into a single confederacy in the course of the
18th century. Initially, the larger chiefdoms in 1730 chose an overall
leader, a chief named Moytoy, who was succeeded in 1741 by his son. The
first task of these leaders was to punish individual Cherokees who attacked
whites, and to deal with the white government. Around 1758 the Cherokees
regularized their decision making with an annual council modeled on
previous village councils and meeting at one village (Echota), which
thereby became a de facto "capital." Eventually, the Cherokees became
literate (as we saw in Chapter 12) and adopted a written constitution.
The Cherokee confederacy was thus formed not by conquest but by the
amalgamation of previously jealous smaller entities, which merged only
290  GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
when threatened with destruction by powerful external forces. In much
the same way, in an example of state formation described in every American
history textbook, the white American colonies themselves, one of
which (Georgia) had precipitated the formation of the Cherokee state,
were impelled to form a nation of their own when threatened with the
powerful external force of the British monarchy. The American colonies
were initially as jealous of their autonomy as the Cherokee chiefdoms, and
their first attempt at amalgamation under the Articles of Confederation
(1781) proved unworkable because it reserved too much autonomy to the
ex-colonies. Only further threats, notably Shays's Rebellion of 1786 and
the unsolved burden of war debt, overcame the ex-colonies' extreme reluctance
to sacrifice autonomy and pushed them into adopting our current
strong federal constitution in 1787. The 19th-century unification of Germany's
jealous principalities proved equally difficult. Three early attempts
(the Frankfurt Parliament of 1848, the restored German Confederation of
1850, and the North German Confederation of 1866) failed before the
external threat of France's declaration of war in 1870 finally led to the
princelets' surrendering much of their power to a central imperial German
government in 1871.
The other mode of formation of complex societies, besides merger
under threat of external force, is merger by conquest. A well-documented
example is the origin of the Zulu state, in southeastern Africa. When first
observed by white settlers, the Zulus were divided into dozens of little
chiefdoms. During the late 1700s, as population pressure rose, fighting
between the chiefdoms became increasingly intense. Among all those chiefdoms,
the ubiquitous problem of devising centralized power structures
was solved most successfully by a chief called Dingiswayo, who gained
ascendancy of the Mtetwa chiefdom by killing a rival around 1807. Dingiswayo
developed a superior centralized military organization by drafting
young men from all villages and grouping them into regiments by age
rather than by their village. He also developed superior centralized political
organization by abstaining from slaughter as he conquered other chiefdoms,
leaving the conquered chief's family intact, and limiting himself to
replacing the conquered chief himself with a relative willing to cooperate
with Dingiswayo. He developed superior centralized conflict resolution by
expanding the adjudication of quarrels. In that way Dingiswayo was able
to conquer and begin the integration of 30 other Zulu chiefdoms. His sucFROM
EGALITARIANISM TO KLEPTOCRACY  291
cessors strengthened the resulting embryonic Zulu state by expanding its
judicial system, policing, and ceremonies.
This Zulu example of a state formed by conquest can be multiplied
almost indefinitely. Native states whose formation from chiefdoms happened
to be witnessed by Europeans in the 18th and 19th centuries include
the Polynesian Hawaiian state, the Polynesian Tahitian state, the Merina
state of Madagascar, Lesotho and Swazi and other southern African states
besides that of the Zulus, the Ashanti state of West Africa, and the Ankole
and Buganda states of Uganda. The Aztec and Inca Empires were formed
by 15th-century conquests, before Europeans arrived, but we know much
about their formation from Indian oral histories transcribed by early Spanish
settlers. The formation of the Roman state and the expansion of the
Macedonian Empire under Alexander were described in detail by contemporary
classical authors.
All these examples illustrate that wars, or threats of war, have played a
key role in most, if not all, amalgamations of societies. But wars, even
between mere bands, have been a constant fact of human history. Why is
it, then, that they evidently began causing amalgamations of societies only
within the past 13,000 years? We had already concluded that the formation
of complex societies is somehow linked to population pressure, so we
should now seek a link between population pressure and the outcome of
war. Why should wars tend to cause amalgamations of societies when
populations are dense but not when they are sparse? The answer is that the
fate of defeated peoples depends on population density, with three possible
outcomes:
Where population densities are very low, as is usual in regions occupied
by hunter-gatherer bands, survivors of a defeated group need only move
farther away from their enemies. That tends to be the result of wars
between nomadic bands in New Guinea and the Amazon.
Where population densities are moderate, as in regions occupied by
food-producing tribes, no large vacant areas remain to which survivors of
a defeated band can flee. But tribal societies without intensive food production
have no employment for slaves and do not produce large enough
food surpluses to be able to yield much tribute. Hence the victors have no
use for survivors of a defeated tribe, unless to take the women in marriage.
The defeated men are killed, and their territory may be occupied by the
victors.
292 " GUNS, GERMS, AND STEEL
Where population densities are high, as in regions occupied by states or
chiefdoms, the defeated still have nowhere to flee, but the victors now
have two options for exploiting them while leaving them alive. Because
chiefdoms and state societies have economic specialization, the defeated
can be used as slaves, as commonly happened in biblical times. Alternatively,
because many such societies have intensive food production systems
capable of yielding large surpluses, the victors can leave the defeated in
place but deprive them of political autonomy, make them pay regular tribute
in food or goods, and amalgamate their society into the victorious state
or chiefdom. This has been the usual outcome of battles associated with
the founding of states or empires throughout recorded history. For example,
the Spanish conquistadores wished to exact tribute from Mexico's
defeated native populations, so they were very interested in the Aztec
Empire's tribute lists. It turned out that the tribute received by the Aztecs
each year from subject peoples had included 7,000 tons of corn, 4,000
tons of beans, 4,000 tons of grain amaranth, 2,000,000 cotton cloaks, and
huge quantities of cacao beans, war costumes, shields, feather headdresses,
and amber.
Thus, food production, and competition and diffusion between societies,
led as ultimate causes, via chains of causation that differed in detail
but that all involved large dense populations and sedentary living, to the
proximate agents of conquest: germs, writing, technology, and centralized
political organization. Because those ultimate causes developed differently
on different continents, so did those agents of conquest. Hence those
agents tended to arise in association with each other, but the association
was not strict: for example, an empire arose without writing among the
Incas, and writing with few epidemic diseases among the Aztecs. Dingis
wayo's Zulus illustrate that each of those agents contributed somewhat
independently to history's pattern. Among the dozens of Zulu chiefdoms,
the Mtetwa chiefdom enjoyed no advantage whatsoever of technology,
writing, or germs over the other chiefdoms, which it nevertheless succeeded
in defeating. Its advantage lay solely in the spheres of government
and ideology. The resulting Zulu state was thereby enabled to conquer a
fraction of a continent for nearly a century.

YALI'S QUESTION WENT TO THE HEART OF THE CURRENT
human condition, and of post-Pleistocene human history. Now that
we have completed this brief tour over the continents, how shall we
answer Yali?
I would say to Yali: the striking differences between the long-term histories
of peoples of the different continents have been due not to innate
differences in the peoples themselves but to differences in their environments.
I expect that if the populations of Aboriginal Australia and Eurasia
could have been interchanged during the Late Pleistocene, the original
Aboriginal Australians would now be the ones occupying most of the
Americas and Australia, as well as Eurasia, while the original Aboriginal
Eurasians would be the ones now reduced to downtrodden population
fragments in Australia. One might at first be inclined to dismiss this assertion
as meaningless, because the experiment is imaginary and my claim
about its outcome cannot be verified. But historians are nevertheless able
to evaluate related hypotheses by retrospective tests. For instance, one can
examine what did happen when European farmers were transplanted to
Greenland or the U.S. Great Plains, and when farmers stemming ultimately
from China emigrated to the Chatham Islands, the rain forests of Borneo,
or the volcanic soils of Java or Hawaii. These tests confirm that the same
4 0 6  EPILOGUE
ancestral peoples either ended up extinct, or returned to living as huntergatherers,
or went on to build complex states, depending on their environments.
Similarly, Aboriginal Australian hunter-gatherers, variously transplanted
to Flinders Island, Tasmania, or southeastern Australia, ended up
extinct, or as hunter-gatherers with the modern world's simplest technology,
or as canal builders intensively managing a productive fishery,
depending on their environments.
Of course, the continents differ in innumerable environmental features
affecting trajectories of human societies. But a mere laundry list of every
possible difference does not constitute an answer to Yali's question. Just
four sets of differences appear to me to be the most important ones.
The first set consists of continental differences in the wild plant and
animal species available as starting materials for domestication. That's
because food production was critical for the accumulation of food surpluses
that could feed non-food-producing specialists, and for the buildup
of large populations enjoying a military advantage through mere numbers
even before they had developed any technological or political advantage.
For both of those reasons, all developments of economically complex,
socially stratified, politically centralized societies beyond the level of small
nascent chiefdoms were based on food production.
But most wild animal and plant species have proved unsuitable for
domestication: food production has been based on relatively few species
of livestock and crops. It turns out that the number of wild candidate
species for domestication varied greatly among the continents, because of
differences in continental areas and also (in the case of big mammals) in
Late Pleistocene extinctions. These extinctions were much more severe in
Australia and the Americas than in Eurasia or Africa. As a result, Africa
ended up biologically somewhat less well endowed than the much larger
Eurasia, the Americas still less so, and Australia even less so, as did Yali's
New Guinea (with one-seventieth of Eurasia's area and with all of its original
big mammals extinct in the Late Pleistocene).
On each continent, animal and plant domestication was concentrated
in a few especially favorable homelands accounting for only a small fraction
of the continent's total area. In the case of technological innovations
and political institutions as well, most societies acquire much more from
other societies than they invent themselves. Thus, diffusion and migration
within a continent contribute importantly to the development of its societies,
which tend in the long run to share each other's developments (insofar
THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE  407
as environments permit) because of the processes illustrated in such simple
form by Maori New Zealand's Musket Wars. That is, societies initially
lacking an advantage either acquire it from societies possessing it or (if
they fail to do so) are replaced by those other societies.
Hence a second set of factors consists of those affecting rates of diffusion
and migration, which differed greatly among continents. They were
most rapid in Eurasia, because of its east-west major axis and its relatively
modest ecological and geographical barriers. The reasoning is straightforward
for movements of crops and livestock, which depend strongly on
climate and hence on latitude. But similar reasoning also applies to the
diffusion of technological innovations, insofar as they are best suited without
modification to specific environments. Diffusion was slower in Africa
and especially in the Americas, because of those continents' north-south
major axes and geographic and ecological barriers. It was also difficult in
traditional New Guinea, where rugged terrain and the long backbone of
high mountains prevented any significant progress toward political and
linguistic unification.
Related to these factors affecting diffusion within continents is a third
set of factors influencing diffusion between continents, which may also
help build up a local pool of domesticates and technology. Ease of intercontinental
diffusion has varied, because some continents are more isolated
than others. Within the last 6,000 years it has been easiest from
Eurasia to sub-Saharan Africa, supplying most of Africa's species of livestock.
But interhemispheric diffusion made no contribution to Native
America's complex societies, isolated from Eurasia at low latitudes by
broad oceans, and at high latitudes by geography and by a climate suitable
just for hunting-gathering. To Aboriginal Australia, isolated from Eurasia
by the water barriers of the Indonesian Archipelago, Eurasia's sole proven
contribution was the dingo.
The fourth and last set of factors consists of continental differences in
area or total population size. A larger area or population means more
potential inventors, more competing societies, more innovations available
to adoptand more pressure to adopt and retain innovations, because
societies failing to do so will tend to be eliminated by competing societies.
That fate befell African pygmies and many other hunter-gatherer populations
displaced by farmers. Conversely, it also befell the stubborn, conservative
Greenland Norse farmers, replaced by Eskimo hunter-gatherers
whose subsistence methods and technology were far superior to those of
4 0 8  EPILOGUE
the Norse under Greenland conditions. Among the world's landmasses,
area and the number of competing societies were largest for Eurasia, much
smaller for Australia and New Guinea and especially for Tasmania. The
Americas, despite their large aggregate area, were fragmented by geography
and ecology and functioned effectively as several poorly connected
smaller continents.
Those four sets of factors constitute big environmental differences that
can be quantified objectively and that are not subject to dispute. While one
can contest my subjective impression that New Guineans are on the average
smarter than Eurasians, one cannot deny that New Guinea has a much
smaller area and far fewer big animal species than Eurasia. But mention
of these environmental differences invites among historians the label "geographic
determinism," which raises hackles. The label seems to have
unpleasant connotations, such as that human creativity counts for nothing,
or that we humans are passive robots helplessly programmed by climate,
fauna, and flora. Of course these fears are misplaced. Without
human inventiveness, all of us today would still be cutting our meat with
stone tools and eating it raw, like our ancestors of a million years ago. All
human societies contain inventive people. It's just that some environments
provide more starting materials, and more favorable conditions for utilizing
inventions, than do other environments.
THESE ANSWERS TO Yali's question are longer and more complicated
than Yali himself would have wanted. Historians, however, may find them
too brief and oversimplified. Compressing 13,000 years of history on all
continents into a 400-page book works out to an average of about one
page per continent per 150 years, making brevity and simplification inevitable.
Yet the compression brings a compensating benefit: long-term comparisons
of regions yield insights that cannot be won from short-term
studies of single societies.
Naturally, a host of issues raised by Yali's question remain unresolved.
At present, we can put forward some partial answers plus a research
agenda for the future, rather than a fully developed theory. The challenge
now is to develop human history as a science, on a par with acknowledged
historical sciences such as astronomy, geology, and evolutionary biology.
Hence it seems appropriate to conclude this book by looking to the future
of the discipline of history, and by outlining some of the unresolved issues.
THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE  409
The most straightforward extension of this book will be to quantify
further, and thus to establish more convincingly the role of, intercontinental
differences in the four sets of factors that appear to be most important.
To illustrate differences in starting materials for domestication, I provided
numbers for each continent's total of large wild terrestrial mammalian herbivores
and omnivores (Table 9.2) and of large-seeded cereals (Table 8.1).
One extension would be to assemble corresponding numbers for largeseeded
legumes (pulses), such as beans, peas, and vetches. In addition, I
mentioned factors disqualifying big mammalian candidates for domestication,
but I did not tabulate how many candidates are disqualified by each
factor on each continent. It would be interesting to do so, especially for
Africa, where a higher percentage of candidates is disqualified than in
Eurasia: which disqualifying factors are most important in Africa, and
what has selected for their high frequency in African mammals? Quantitative
data should also be assembled to test my preliminary calculations suggesting
differing rates of diffusion along the major axes of Eurasia, the
Americas, and Africa.
A SECOND EXTENSION will be to smaller geographic scales and shorter
time scales than those of this book. For instance, the following obvious
question has probably occurred to readers already: why, within Eurasia,
were European societies, rather than those of the Fertile Crescent or China
or India, the ones that colonized America and Australia, took the lead
in technology, and became politically and economically dominant in the
modern world? A historian who had lived at any time between 8500 B.C.
and A.D. 1450, and who had tried then to predict future historical trajectories,
would surely have labeled Europe's eventual dominance as the least
likely outcome, because Europe was the most backward of those three Old
World regions for most of those 10,000 years. From 8500 B.c. until the
rise of Greece and then Italy after 500 B.C., almost all major innovations
in western Eurasiaanimal domestication, plant domestication, writing,
metallurgy, wheels, states, and so onarose in or near the Fertile Crescent.
Until the proliferation of water mills after about A.D. 900, Europe west or
north of the Alps contributed nothing of significance to Old World technology
or civilization; it was instead a recipient of developments from the
eastern Mediterranean, Fertile Crescent, and China. Even from A.D. 1000
to 1450 the flow of science and technology was predominantly into
410  EPILOGUE
Europe from the Islamic societies stretching from India to North Africa,
rather than vice versa. During those same centuries China led the world in
technology, having launched itself on food production nearly as early as
the Fertile Crescent did.
Why, then, did the Fertile Crescent and China eventually lose their enormous
leads of thousands of years to late-starting Europe? One can, of
course, point to proximate factors behind Europe's rise: its development
of a merchant class, capitalism, and patent protection for inventions, its
failure to develop absolute despots and crushing taxation, and its Greco-
Judeo-Christian tradition of critical empirical inquiry. Still, for all such
proximate causes one must raise the question of ultimate cause: why did
these proximate factors themselves arise in Europe, rather than in China
or the Fertile Crescent?
For the Fertile Crescent, the answer is clear. Once it had lost the head
start that it had enjoyed thanks to its locally available concentration of
domesticable wild plants and animals, the Fertile Crescent possessed no
further compelling geographic advantages. The disappearance of that head
start can be traced in detail, as the westward shift in powerful empires.
After the rise of Fertile Crescent states in the fourth millennium B.c., the
center of power initially remained in the Fertile Crescent, rotating between
empires such as those of Babylon, the Hittites, Assyria, and Persia. With
the Greek conquest of all advanced societies from Greece east to India
under Alexander the Great in the late fourth century B.C., power finally
made its first shift irrevocably westward. It shifted farther west with
Rome's conquest of Greece in the second century B.c., and after the fall of
the Roman Empire it eventually moved again, to western and northern
Europe.
The major factor behind these shifts becomes obvious as soon as one
compares the modern Fertile Crescent with ancient descriptions of it.
Today, the expressions "Fertile Crescent" and "world leader in food production"
are absurd. Large areas of the former Fertile Crescent are now
desert, semidesert, steppe, or heavily eroded or salinized terrain unsuited
for agriculture. Today's ephemeral wealth of some of the region's nations,
based on the single nonrenewable resource of oil, conceals the region's
long-standing fundamental poverty and difficulty in feeding itself.
In ancient times, however, much of the Fertile Crescent and eastern
Mediterranean region, including Greece, was covered with forest. The
region's transformation from fertile woodland to eroded scrub or desert
T H E F U T U R E OF H U M A N H I S T O R Y AS A S C I E N C E  411
has been elucidated by paleobotanists and archaeologists. Its woodlands
were cleared for agriculture, or cut to obtain construction timber, or
burned as firewood or for manufacturing plaster. Because of low rainfall
and hence low primary productivity (proportional to rainfall), regrowth
of vegetation could not keep pace with its destruction, especially in the
presence of overgrazing by abundant goats. With the tree and grass cover
removed, erosion proceeded and valleys silted up, while irrigation agriculture
in the low-rainfall environment led to salt accumulation. These processes,
which began in the Neolithic era, continued into modern times. For
instance, the last forests near the ancient Nabataean capital of Petra, in
modern Jordan, were felled by the Ottoman Turks during construction of
the Hejaz railroad just before World War I.
Thus, Fertile Crescent and eastern Mediterranean societies had the misfortune
to arise in an ecologically fragile environment. They committed
ecological suicide by destroying their own resource base. Power shifted
westward as each eastern Mediterranean society in turn undermined itself,
beginning with the oldest societies, those in the east (the Fertile Crescent).
Northern and western Europe has been spared this fate, not because its
inhabitants have been wiser but because they have had the good luck to
live in a more robust environment with higher rainfall, in which vegetation
regrows quickly. Much of northern and western Europe is still able to
support productive intensive agriculture today, 7,000 years after the
arrival of food production. In effect, Europe received its crops, livestock,
technology, and writing systems from the Fertile Crescent, which then
gradually eliminated itself as a major center of power and innovation.
That is how the Fertile Crescent lost its huge early lead over Europe.
Why did China also lose its lead? Its falling behind is initially surprising,
because China enjoyed undoubted advantages: a rise of food production
nearly as early as in the Fertile Crescent; ecological diversity from North
to South China and from the coast to the high mountains of the Tibetan
plateau, giving rise to a diverse set of crops, animals, and technology; a
large and productive expanse, nourishing the largest regional human population
in the world; and an environment less dry or ecologically fragile
than the Fertile Crescent's, allowing China still to support productive
intensive agriculture after nearly 10,000 years, though its environmental
problems are increasing today and are more serious than western Europe's.
These advantages and head start enabled medieval China to lead the
world in technology. The long list of its major technological firsts includes
4 1 2  EPILOGUE
cast iron, the compass, gunpowder, paper, printing, and many others mentioned
earlier. It also led the world in political power, navigation, and
control of the seas. In the early 15th century it sent treasure fleets, each
consisting of hundreds of ships up to 400 feet long and with total crews
of up to 28,000, across the Indian Ocean as far as the east coast of Africa,
decades before Columbus's three puny ships crossed the narrow Atlantic
Ocean to the Americas' east coast. Why didn't Chinese ships proceed
around Africa's southern cape westward and colonize Europe, before
Vasco da Gama's own three puny ships rounded the Cape of Good Hope
eastward and launched Europe's colonization of East Asia? Why didn't
Chinese ships cross the Pacific to colonize the Americas' west coast? Why,
in brief, did China lose its technological lead to the formerly so backward
Europe?
The end of China's treasure fleets gives us a clue. Seven of those fleets
sailed from China between A.D. 1405 and 1433. They were then suspended
as a result of a typical aberration of local politics that could happen
anywhere in the world: a power struggle between two factions at the
Chinese court (the eunuchs and their opponents). The former faction had
been identified with sending and captaining the fleets. Hence when the
latter faction gained the upper hand in a power struggle, it stopped sending
fleets, eventually dismantled the shipyards, and forbade oceangoing shipping.
The episode is reminiscent of the legislation that strangled development
of public electric lighting in London in the 1880s, the isolationism
of the United States between the First and Second World Wars, and any
number of backward steps in any number of countries, all motivated by
local political issues. But in China there was a difference, because the
entire region was politically unified. One decision stopped fleets over the
whole of China. That one temporary decision became irreversible, because
no shipyards remained to turn out ships that would prove the folly of that
temporary decision, and to serve as a focus for rebuilding other shipyards.
Now contrast those events in China with what happened when fleets of
exploration began to sail from politically fragmented Europe. Christopher
Columbus, an Italian by birth, switched his allegiance to the duke of Anjou
in France, then to the king of Portugal. When the latter refused his request
for ships in which to explore westward, Columbus turned to the duke of
Medina-Sedonia, who also refused, then to the count of Medina-Celi, who
did likewise, and finally to the king and queen of Spain, who denied
Columbus's first request but eventually granted his renewed appeal. Had
THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE  413
Europe been united under any one of the first three rulers, its colonization
of the Americas might have been stillborn.
In fact, precisely because Europe was fragmented, Columbus succeeded
on his fifth try in persuading one of Europe's hundreds of princes to sponsor
him. Once Spain had thus launched the European colonization of
America, other European states saw the wealth flowing into Spain, and six
more joined in colonizing America. The story was the same with Europe's
cannon, electric lighting, printing, small firearms, and innumerable other
innovations: each was at first neglected or opposed in some parts of
Europe for idiosyncratic reasons, but once adopted in one area, it eventually
spread to the rest of Europe.
These consequences of Europe's disunity stand in sharp contrast to
those of China's unity. From time to time the Chinese court decided to halt
other activities besides overseas navigation: it abandoned development of
an elaborate water-driven spinning machine, stepped back from the verge
of an industrial revolution in the 14th century, demolished or virtually
abolished mechanical clocks after leading the world in clock construction,
and retreated from mechanical devices and technology in general after the
late 15th century. Those potentially harmful effects of unity have flared
up again in modern China, notably during the madness of the Cultural
Revolution in the 1960s and 1970s, when a decision by one or a few leaders
closed the whole country's school systems for five years.
China's frequent unity and Europe's perpetual disunity both have a long
history. The most productive areas of modern China were politically
joined for the first time in 221 B.C. and have remained so for most of
the time since then. China has had only a single writing system from the
beginnings of literacy, a single dominant language for a long time, and
substantial cultural unity for two thousand years. In contrast, Europe has
never come remotely close to political unification: it was still splintered
into 1,000 independent statelets in the 14th century, into 500 statelets in
A.D. 1500, got down to a minimum of 25 states in the 1980s, and is now
up again to nearly 40 at the moment that I write this sentence. Europe still
has 45 languages, each with its own modified alphabet, and even greater
cultural diversity. The disagreements that continue today to frustrate even
modest attempts at European unification through the European Economic
Community (EEC) are symptomatic of Europe's ingrained commitment to
disunity.
Hence the real problem in understanding China's loss of political and
4 1 4 " EPILOGUE
technological preeminence to Europe is to understand China's chronic
unity and Europe's chronic disunity. The answer is again suggested by
maps (see page 415). Europe has a highly indented coastline, with five
large peninsulas that approach islands in their isolation, and all of which
evolved independent languages, ethnic groups, and governments: Greece,
Italy, Iberia, Denmark, and Norway / Sweden. China's coastline is much
smoother, and only the nearby Korean Peninsula attained separate importance.
Europe has two islands (Britain and Ireland) sufficiently big to assert
their political independence and to maintain their own languages and ethnicities,
and one of them (Britain) big and close enough to become a major
independent European power. But even China's two largest islands, Taiwan
and Hainan, have each less than half the area of Ireland; neither was
a major independent power until Taiwan's emergence in recent decades;
and Japan's geographic isolation kept it until recently much more isolated
politically from the Asian mainland than Britain has been from mainland
Europe. Europe is carved up into independent linguistic, ethnic, and political
units by high mountains (the Alps, Pyrenees, Carpathians, and Norwegian
border mountains), while China's mountains east of the Tibetan
plateau are much less formidable barriers. China's heartland is bound
together from east to west by two long navigable river systems in rich
alluvial valleys (the Yangtze and Yellow Rivers), and it is joined from north
to south by relatively easy connections between these two river systems
(eventually linked by canals). As a result, China very early became dominated
by two huge geographic core areas of high productivity, themselves
only weakly separated from each other and eventually fused into a single
core. Europe's two biggest rivers, the Rhine and Danube, are smaller and
connect much less of Europe. Unlike China, Europe has many scattered
small core areas, none big enough to dominate the others for long, and
each the center of chronically independent states.
Once China was finally unified, in 221 B.C., no other independent state
ever had a chance of arising and persisting for long in China. Although
periods of disunity returned several times after 221 B.C., they always ended
in reunification. But the unification of Europe has resisted the efforts of
such determined conquerors as Charlemagne, Napoleon, and Hitler; even
the Roman Empire at its peak never controlled more than half of Europe's
area.
Thus, geographic connectedness and only modest internal barriers gave
China an initial advantage. North China, South China, the coast, and the
Comparison of the coastlines of China and of Europe, drawn to the same
scale. Note that Europe's is much more indented and includes more large
peninsulas and two large islands.
4 1 6  EPILOGUE
interior contributed different crops, livestock, technologies, and cultural
features to the eventually unified China. For example, millet cultivation,
bronze technology, and writing arose in North China, while rice cultivation
and cast-iron technology emerged in South China. For much of this
book I have emphasized the diffusion of technology that takes place in
the absence of formidable barriers. But China's connectedness eventually
became a disadvantage, because a decision by one despot could and repeatedly
did halt innovation. In contrast, Europe's geographic balkanization
resulted in dozens or hundreds of independent, competing statelets and
centers of innovation. If one state did not pursue some particular innovation,
another did, forcing neighboring states to do likewise or else be conquered
or left economically behind. Europe's barriers were sufficient to
prevent political unification, but insufficient to halt the spread of technology
and ideas. There has never been one despot who could turn off the tap
for all of Europe, as of China.
These comparisons suggest that geographic connectedness has exerted
both positive and negative effects on the evolution of technology. As a
result, in the very long run, technology may have developed most rapidly
in regions with moderate connectedness, neither too high nor too low.
Technology's course over the last 1,000 years in China, Europe, and possibly
the Indian subcontinent exemplifies those net effects of high, moderate,
and low connectedness, respectively.
Naturally, additional factors contributed to history's diverse courses in
different parts of Eurasia. For instance, the Fertile Crescent, China, and
Europe differed in their exposure to the perennial threat of barbarian invasions
by horse-mounted pastoral nomads of Central Asia. One of those
nomad groups (the Mongols) eventually destroyed the ancient irrigation
systems of Iran and Iraq, but none of the Asian nomads ever succeeded in
establishing themselves in the forests of western Europe beyond the Hungarian
plains. Environmental factors also include the Fertile Crescent's
geographically intermediate location, controlling the trade routes linking
China and India to Europe, and China's more remote location from Eurasia's
other advanced civilizations, making China a gigantic virtual island
within a continent. China's relative isolation is especially relevant to its
adoption and then rejection of technologies, so reminiscent of the rejections
on Tasmania and other islands (Chapters 13 and 15). But this brief
discussion may at least indicate the relevance of environmental factors to
THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE  417
smaller-scale and shorter-term patterns of history, as well as to history's
broadest pattern.
The histories of the Fertile Crescent and China also hold a salutary
lesson for the modern world: circumstances change, and past primacy is
no guarantee of future primacy. One might even wonder whether the geographical
reasoning employed throughout this book has at last become
wholly irrelevant in the modern world, now that ideas diffuse everywhere
instantly on the Internet and cargo is routinely airfreighted overnight
between continents. It might seem that entirely new rules apply to competition
between the world's peoples, and that as a result new powers are
emergingsuch as Taiwan, Korea, Malaysia, and especially Japan.
On reflection, though, we see that the supposedly new rules are just
variations on the old ones. Yes, the transistor, invented at Bell Labs in the
eastern United States in 1947, leapt 8,000 miles to launch an electronics
industry in Japanbut it did not make the shorter leap to found new
industries in Zaire or Paraguay. The nations rising to new power are still
ones that were incorporated thousands of years ago into the old centers of
dominance based on food production, or that have been repopulated by
peoples from those centers. Unlike Zaire or Paraguay, Japan and the other
new powers were able to exploit the transistor quickly because their populations
already had a long history of literacy, metal machinery, and centralized
government. The world's two earliest centers of food production, the
Fertile Crescent and China, still dominate the modern world, either
through their immediate successor states (modern China), or through
states situated in neighboring regions influenced early by those two centers
(Japan, Korea, Malaysia, and Europe), or through states repopulated or
ruled by their overseas emigrants (the United States, Australia, Brazil).
Prospects for world dominance of sub-Saharan Africans, Aboriginal Australians,
and Native Americans remain dim. The hand of history's course
at 8000 B.C. lies heavily on us.
AMONG OTHER FACTORS relevant to answering Yali's question, cultural
factors and influences of individual people loom large. To take the
former first, human cultural traits vary greatly around the world. Some of
that cultural variation is no doubt a product of environmental variation,
and I have discussed many examples in this book. But an important ques4
1 8  EPILOGUE
tion concerns the possible significance of local cultural factors unrelated
to the environment. A minor cultural feature may arise for trivial, temporary
local reasons, become fixed, and then predispose a society toward
more important cultural choices, as is suggested by applications of chaos
theory to other fields of science. Such cultural processes are among history's
wild cards that would tend to make history unpredictable.
As one example, I mentioned in Chapter 13 the QWERTY keyboard
for typewriters. It was adopted initially, out of many competing keyboard
designs, for trivial specific reasons involving early typewriter construction
in America in the 1860s, typewriter salesmanship, a decision in 1882 by a
certain Ms. Longley who founded the Shorthand and Typewriter Institute
in Cincinnati, and the success of Ms. Longley's star typing pupil Frank
McGurrin, who thrashed Ms. Longley's non-QWERTY competitor Louis
Taub in a widely publicized typing contest in 1888. The decision could
have gone to another keyboard at any of numerous stages between the
1860s and the 1880s; nothing about the American environment favored
the QWERTY keyboard over its rivals. Once the decision had been made,
though, the QWERTY keyboard became so entrenched that it was also
adopted for computer keyboard design a century later. Equally trivial specific
reasons, now lost in the remote past, may have lain behind the Sumerian
adoption of a counting system based on 12 instead of 10 (leading to
our modern 60-minute hour, 24-hour day, 12-month year, and 360-degree
circle), in contrast to the widespread Mesoamerican counting system based
on 20 (leading to its calendar using two concurrent cycles of 260 named
days and a 365-day year).
Those details of typewriter, clock, and calendar design have not affected
the competitive success of the societies adopting them. But it is easy to
imagine how they could have. For example, if the QWERTY keyboard of
the United States had not been adopted elsewhere in the world as well
say, if Japan or Europe had adopted the much more efficient Dvorak keyboard
that trivial decision in the 19th century might have had big consequences
for the competitive position of 20th-century American technology.
Similarly, a study of Chinese children suggested that they learn to write
more quickly when taught an alphabetic transcription of Chinese sounds
(termed pinyin) than when taught traditional Chinese writing, with its
thousands of signs. It has been suggested that the latter arose because of
their convenience for distinguishing the large numbers of Chinese words
possessing differing meanings but the same sounds (homophones). If so,
THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE  419
the abundance of homophones in the Chinese language may have had a
large impact on the role of literacy in Chinese society, yet it seems unlikely
that there was anything in the Chinese environment selecting for a language
rich in homophones. Did a linguistic or cultural factor account for
the otherwise puzzling failure of complex Andean civilizations to develop
writing? Was there anything about India's environment predisposing
toward rigid socioeconomic castes, with grave consequences for the development
of technology in India? Was there anything about the Chinese
environment predisposing toward Confucian philosophy and cultural conservatism,
which may also have profoundly affected history? Why was
proselytizing religion (Christianity and Islam) a driving force for colonization
and conquest among Europeans and West Asians but not among Chinese?
These examples illustrate the broad range of questions concerning cultural
idiosyncrasies, unrelated to environment and initially of little significance,
that might evolve into influential and long-lasting cultural features.
Their significance constitutes an important unanswered question. It can
best be approached by concentrating attention on historical patterns that
remain puzzling after the effects of major environmental factors have been
taken into account.
WHAT ABOUT THE effects of idiosyncratic individual people? A familiar
modern example is the narrow failure, on July 20, 1944, of the assassination
attempt against Hitler and of a simultaneous uprising in Berlin.
Both had been planned by Germans who were convinced that the war
could not be won and who wanted to seek peace then, at a time when the
eastern front between the German and Russian armies still lay mostly
within Russia's borders. Hitler was wounded by a time bomb in a briefcase
placed under a conference table; he might have been killed if the case had
been placed slightly closer to the chair where he was sitting. It is likely that
the modern map of Eastern Europe and the Cold War's course would have
been significantly different if Hitler had indeed been killed and if World
War II had ended then.
Less well known but even more fateful was a traffic accident in the
summer of 1930, over two years before Hitler's seizure of power in Germany,
when a car in which he was riding in the "death seat" (right front
passenger seat) collided with a heavy trailer truck. The truck braked just
420  EPILOGUE
in time to avoid running over Hitler's car and crushing him. Because of
the degree to which Hitler's psychopathology determined Nazi policy and
success, the form of an eventual World War II would probably have been
quite different if the truck driver had braked one second later.
One can think of other individuals whose idiosyncrasies apparently
influenced history as did Hitler's: Alexander the Great, Augustus, Buddha,
Christ, Lenin, Martin Luther, the Inca emperor Pachacuti, Mohammed,
William the Conqueror, and the Zulu king Shaka, to name a few. To what
extent did each really change events, as opposed to "just" happening to be
the right person in the right place at the right time? At the one extreme is
the view of the historian Thomas Carlyle: "Universal history, the history
of what man [sic] has accomplished in this world, is at bottom the History
of the Great Men who have worked here." At the opposite extreme is the
view of the Prussian statesman Otto von Bismarck, who unlike Carlyle
had long firsthand experience of politics' inner workings: "The statesman's
task is to hear God's footsteps marching through history, and to try to
catch on to His coattails as He marches past."
Like cultural idiosyncrasies, individual idiosyncrasies throw wild cards
into the course of history. They may make history inexplicable in terms of
environmental forces, or indeed of any generalizable causes. For the purposes
of this book, however, they are scarcely relevant, because even the
most ardent proponent of the Great Man theory would find it difficult to
interpret history's broadest pattern in terms of a few Great Men. Perhaps
Alexander the Great did nudge the course of western Eurasia's already
literate, food-producing, iron-equipped states, but he had nothing to do
with the fact that western Eurasia already supported literate, food-producing,
iron-equipped states at a time when Australia still supported only nonliterate
hunter-gatherer tribes lacking metal tools. Nevertheless, it remains
an open question how wide and lasting the effects of idiosyncratic individuals
on history really are.
THE DISCIPLINE OF history is generally not considered to be a science,
but something closer to the humanities. At best, history is classified among
the social sciences, of which it rates as the least scientific. While the field
of government is often termed "political science" and the Nobel Prize in
economics refers to "economic science," history departments rarely if ever
T H E F U T U R E OF H U M A N H I S T O R Y AS A S C I E N C E  421
label themselves "Department of Historical Science." Most historians do
not think of themselves as scientists and receive little training in acknowledged
sciences and their methodologies. The sense that history is nothing
more than a mass of details is captured in numerous aphorisms: "History
is just one damn fact after another," "History is more or less bunk,"
"There is no law of history any more than of a kaleidoscope," and so on.
One cannot deny that it is more difficult to extract general principles
from studying history than from studying planetary orbits. However, the
difficulties seem to me not fatal. Similar ones apply to other historical subjects
whose place among the natural sciences is nevertheless secure, including
astronomy, climatology, ecology, evolutionary biology, geology, and
paleontology. People's image of science is unfortunately often based on
physics and a few other fields with similar methodologies. Scientists in
those fields tend to be ignorantly disdainful of fields to which those methodologies
are inappropriate and which must therefore seek other methodologies
such as my own research areas of ecology and evolutionary
biology. But recall that the word "science" means "knowledge" (from the
Latin scire, "to know," and scientia, "knowledge"), to be obtained by
whatever methods are most appropriate to the particular field. Hence I
have much empathy with students of human history for the difficulties
they face.
Historical sciences in the broad sense (including astronomy and the like)
share many features that set them apart from nonhistorical sciences such
as physics, chemistry, and molecular biology. I would single out four:
methodology, causation, prediction, and complexity.
In physics the chief method for gaining knowledge is the laboratory
experiment, by which one manipulates the parameter whose effect is in
question, executes parallel control experiments with that parameter held
constant, holds other parameters constant throughout, replicates both the
experimental manipulation and the control experiment, and obtains quantitative
data. This strategy, which also works well in chemistry and molecular
biology, is so identified with science in the minds of many people that
experimentation is often held to be the essence of the scientific method. But
laboratory experimentation can obviously play little or no role in many of
the historical sciences. One cannot interrupt galaxy formation, start and
stop hurricanes and ice ages, experimentally exterminate grizzly bears in a
few national parks, or rerun the course of dinosaur evolution. Instead, one
4 2 2  E P I L O G UE
must gain knowledge in these historical sciences by other means, such as
observation, comparison, and so-called natural experiments (to which I
shall return in a moment).
Historical sciences are concerned with chains of proximate and ultimate
causes. In most of physics and chemistry the concepts of "ultimate cause,"
"purpose," and "function" are meaningless, yet they are essential to
understanding living systems in general and human activities in particular.
For instance, an evolutionary biologist studying Arctic hares whose fur
color turns from brown in summer to white in winter is not satisfied with
identifying the mundane proximate causes of fur color in terms of the fur
pigments' molecular structures and biosynthetic pathways. The more
important questions involve function (camouflage against predators?) and
ultimate cause (natural selection starting with an ancestral hare population
with seasonally unchanging fur color?). Similarly, a European historian is
not satisfied with describing the condition of Europe in both 1815 and
1918 as having just achieved peace after a costly pan-European war.
Understanding the contrasting chains of events leading up to the two peace
treaties is essential to understanding why an even more costly pan-European
war broke out again within a few decades of 1918 but not of 1815.
But chemists do not assign a purpose or function to a collision of two gas
molecules, nor do they seek an ultimate cause for the collision.
Still another difference between historical and nonhistorical sciences
involves prediction. In chemistry and physics the acid test of one's understanding
of a system is whether one can successfully predict its future
behavior. Again, physicists tend to look down on evolutionary biology
and history, because those fields appear to fail this test. In historical sciences,
one can provide a posteriori explanations (e.g., why an asteroid
impact on Earth 66 million years ago may have driven dinosaurs but not
many other species to extinction), but a priori predictions are more difficult
(we would be uncertain which species would be driven to extinction
if we did not have the actual past event to guide us). However, historians
and historical scientists do make and test predictions about what future
discoveries of data will show us about past events.
The properties of historical systems that complicate attempts at prediction
can be described in several alternative ways. One can point out that
human societies and dinosaurs are extremely complex, being characterized
by an enormous number of independent variables that feed back on each
other. As a result, small changes at a lower level of organization can lead
THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE  4 2 3
to emergent changes at a higher level. A typical example is the effect of
that one truck driver's braking response, in Hitler's nearly fatal traffic accident
of 1930, on the lives of a hundred million people who were killed or
wounded in World War II. Although most biologists agree that biological
systems are in the end wholly determined by their physical properties and
obey the laws of quantum mechanics, the systems' complexity means, for
practical purposes, that that deterministic causation does not translate into
predictability. Knowledge of quantum mechanics does not help one understand
why introduced placental predators have exterminated so many Australian
marsupial species, or why the Allied Powers rather than the Central
Powers won World War I.
Each glacier, nebula, hurricane, human society, and biological species,
and even each individual and cell of a sexually reproducing species, is
unique, because it is influenced by so many variables and made up of so
many variable parts. In contrast, for any of the physicist's elementary particles
and isotopes and of the chemist's molecules, all individuals of the
entity are identical to each other. Hence physicists and chemists can formulate
universal deterministic laws at the macroscopic level, but biologists
and historians can formulate only statistical trends. With a very high probability
of being correct, I can predict that, of the next 1,000 babies born
at the University of California Medical Center, where I work, not fewer
than 480 or more than 520 will be boys. But I had no means of knowing
in advance that my own two children would be boys. Similarly, historians
note that tribal societies may have been more likely to develop into chiefdoms
if the local population was sufficiently large and dense and if there
was potential for surplus food production than if that was not the case.
But each such local population has its own unique features, with the result
that chiefdoms did emerge in the highlands of Mexico, Guatemala, Peru,
and Madagascar, but not in those of New Guinea or Guadalcanal.
Still another way of describing the complexity and unpredictability of
historical systems, despite their ultimate determinacy, is to note that long
chains of causation may separate final effects from ultimate causes lying
outside the domain of that field of science. For example, the dinosaurs
may have been exterminated by the impact of an asteroid whose orbit was
completely determined by the laws of classical mechanics. But if there had
been any paleontologists living 67 million years ago, they could not have
predicted the dinosaurs' imminent demise, because asteroids belong to a
field of science otherwise remote from dinosaur biology. Similarly, the Lit4
2 . 4 * EPILOGUE
tle Ice Age of A.D. 1300-1500 contributed to the extinction of the Greenland
Norse, but no historian, and probably not even a modern cli
matologist, could have predicted the Little Ice Age.
THUS, THE DIFFICULTIES historians face in establishing cause-andeffect
relations in the history of human societies are broadly similar to
the difficulties facing astronomers, climatologists, ecologists, evolutionary
biologists, geologists, and paleontologists. To varying degrees, each of
these fields is plagued by the impossibility of performing replicated, controlled
experimental interventions, the complexity arising from enormous
numbers of variables, the resulting uniqueness of each system, the consequent
impossibility of formulating universal laws, and the difficulties of
predicting emergent properties and future behavior. Prediction in history,
as in other historical sciences, is most feasible on large spatial scales and
over long times, when the unique features of millions of small-scale brief
events become averaged out. Just as I could predict the sex ratio of the
next 1,000 newborns but not the sexes of my own two children, the historian
can recognize factors that made inevitable the broad outcome of the
collision between American and Eurasian societies after 13,000 years of
separate developments, but not the outcome of the 1960 U.S. presidential
election. The details of which candidate said what during a single televised
debate in October 1960 could have given the electoral victory to Nixon
instead of to Kennedy, but no details of who said what could have blocked
the European conquest of Native Americans.
How can students of human history profit from the experience of scientists
in other historical sciences? A methodology that has proved useful
involves the comparative method and so-called natural experiments. While
neither astronomers studying galaxy formation nor human historians can
manipulate their systems in controlled laboratory experiments, they both
can take advantage of natural experiments, by comparing systems differing
in the presence or absence (or in the strong or weak effect) of some
putative causative factor. For example, epidemiologists, forbidden to feed
large amounts of salt to people experimentally, have still been able to identify
effects of high salt intake by comparing groups of humans who already
differ greatly in their salt intake; and cultural anthropologists, unable to
provide human groups experimentally with varying resource abundances
for many centuries, still study long-term effects of resource abundance on
THE FUTURE OF HUMAN HISTORY AS A SCIENCE  4 2 5
human societies by comparing recent Polynesian populations living on
islands differing naturally in resource abundance. The student of human
history can draw on many more natural experiments than just comparisons
among the five inhabited continents. Comparisons can also utilize
large islands that have developed complex societies in a considerable
degree of isolation (such as Japan, Madagascar, Native American Hispan
iola, New Guinea, Hawaii, and many others), as well as societies on hundreds
of smaller islands and regional societies within each of the
continents.
Natural experiments in any field, whether in ecology or human history,
are inherently open to potential methodological criticisms. Those include
confounding effects of natural variation in additional variables besides the
one of interest, as well as problems in inferring chains of causation from
observed correlations between variables. Such methodological problems
have been discussed in great detail for some of the historical sciences. In
particular, epidemiology, the science of drawing inferences about human
diseases by comparing groups of people (often by retrospective historical
studies), has for a long time successfully employed formalized procedures
for dealing with problems similar to those facing historians of human societies.
Ecologists have also devoted much attention to the problems of natural
experiments, a methodology to which they must resort in many cases
where direct experimental interventions to manipulate relevant ecological
variables would be immoral, illegal, or impossible. Evolutionary biologists
have recently been developing ever more sophisticated methods for drawing
conclusions from comparisons of different plants and animals of
known evolutionary histories.
In short, I acknowledge that it is much more difficult to understand
human history than to understand problems in fields of science where history
is unimportant and where fewer individual variables operate. Nevertheless,
successful methodologies for analyzing historical problems have
been worked out in several fields. As a result, the histories of dinosaurs,
nebulas, and glaciers are generally acknowledged to belong to fields of
science rather than to the humanities. But introspection gives us far more
insight into the ways of other humans than into those of dinosaurs. I am
thus optimistic that historical studies of human societies can be pursued as
scientifically as studies of dinosaursand with profit to our own society
today, by teaching us what shaped the modern world, and what might
shape our future.