Sophies World
Jostien Gaarder
Reviews:
More praise for the international bestseller that has become Europes oddball
literary sensation of the decade
(New York Newsday)
A page-turner. Entertainment Weekly
First, think of a beginners guide to philosophy, written by a schoolteacher ...
Next, imagine a fantasy novel something like a modern-day version of Through the
Looking Glass. Meld these disparate genres, and what do you get? Well, what you get
is an improbable international bestseller ... a runaway hit... [a] tour deforce.
Time
Compelling. Los Angeles Times
Its depth of learning, its intelligence and its totally original conception give it
enormous magnetic appeal ... To be fully human, and to feel our continuity with 3,000
years of philosophical inquiry, we need to put ourselves in Sophies world. Boston
Sunday Globe
Involving and often humorous. USA Today
In the adroit hands of Jostein Gaarder, the whole sweep of three millennia of
Western philosophy is rendered as lively as a gossip column ... Literary sorcery of the
first rank. Fort Worth Star-Telegram
A comprehensive history of Western philosophy as recounted to a 14-year-old
Norwegian schoolgirl... The book will serve as a first-rate introduction to anyone who
never took an introductory philosophy course, and as a pleasant refresher for those
who have and have forgotten most of it... [Sophies mother] is a marvelous comic
foil. Newsweek
Terrifically entertaining and imaginative ... Ill read Sophies World again. 
Daily Mail
What is admirable in the novel is the utter unpretentious-ness of the
philosophical lessons, the plain and workmanlike prose which manages to deliver
Western philosophy in accounts that are crystal clear. It is heartening to know that a
book subtitled
A Novel About the History of Philosophy was not only a bestseller in France,
but for a while Europes hottest novel.
The Washington Post Book World
A rare bird indeed, a short history of Western philosophical thought from
Socrates to Sartre, coyly embedded in the wrapping of a suspense novel. New
York Newsday
A simply wonderful, irresistible book ... a cross between Bertrand Russells
History of Western Philosophy and Alice in Wonderland. The Daily Telegraph
An exciting trek into, the realm of thought, from the ancient philosophers
school of Athens to the Konigsberg of Kant... and a brilliant success. -Der Spiegel
Intelligently written... an enchanting way to learn philosophy. Baton
Rouge Magazine
Just as remarkable for its playful premise as it is for its accessibility ... The
essential charm of Sophies World lies in the innocent curiosity of the young
character, and the clever narrative structure Gaarder designed to pique it.
Columbus Dispatch
An extraordinary writer. Madeleine LEngle
Sophies World
A Novel About the History of Philosophy
JOSTEIN GAARDER
Translated by Paulette Miller
BERKLEY BOOKS, NEW YORK
If you purchased this book without a cover, you should be aware that this book
is stolen property. It was reported as unsold and destroyed to the publisher, and
neither the author nor the publisher has received any payment for this stripped
book.
SOPHIES WORLD
A Berkley Book / published by arrangement with Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
Inc.
PRINTING HISTORY
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, Inc., edition published 1994 Berkley edition / March
1996 All rights reserved.
Originally published in Norwegian under the title Sofies verden, copyright 
1991 by H. Aschehoug & Co. (W. Nygaard), Oslo.
Translation copyright  1994 by Paulette Moller.
This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, by mimeograph or any
other means, without permission. For information address: Farrar, Straus, and
Giroux, Inc., 19 Union Square West, New York, New York 10003.
The Putnam Berkley World Wide Web site address is http://www.berkley.com
ISBN: 0-425-15225-1
BERKLEY
Berkley Books are published by The Berkley Publishing Group, 200 Madison
Avenue, New York, New York 10016.
BERKLEY and the B design are trademarks belonging to Berkley Publishing
Corporation.
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 10
Acknowledgments
This book would not have been possible without the support and encouragement
of Siri Dan-nevig. Thanks are also due to Maiken Ims for reading the manuscript and
making useful comments, and to Trond Berg Eriksen for his trenchant observations
and knowledgeable support through the years.
J.G.
He who cannot draw on three thousand years
Is living from hand to mouth
GOETHE
THE GARDEN OF EDEN
 at some point something must have come from nothing 
Sophie Amundsen was on her way home from school. She had walked the first
part of the way with Joanna. They had been discussing robots. Joanna thought the human
brain was like an advanced computer. Sophie was not certain she agreed. Surely
a person was more than a piece of hardware?
When they got to the supermarket they went their separate ways. Sophie lived
on the outskirts of a sprawling suburb and had almost twice as far to school as Joanna.
There were no other houses beyond her garden, which made it seem as if her house
lay at the end of the world. This was where the woods began.
She turned the corner into Clover Close. At the end of the road there was a
sharp bend, known as Captains Bend. People seldom went that way except on the
weekend.
It was early May. In some of the gardens the fruit trees were encircled with
dense clusters of daffodils. The birches were already in pale green leaf.
It was extraordinary how everything burst forth at this time of year! What made
this great mass of green vegetation come welling up from the dead earth as soon as it
got warm and the last traces of snow disappeared?
As Sophie opened her garden gate, she looked in the mailbox. There was
usually a lot of junk mail and a few big envelopes for her mother, a pile to dump on
the kitchen table before she went up to her room to start her homework.
From time to time there would be a few letters from the bank for her father, but
then he was not a normal father. Sophies father was the captain of a big oil tanker,
and was away for most of the year. During the few weeks at a time when he was at
home, he would shuffle around the house making it nice and cozy for Sophie and her
mother. But when he was at sea he could seem very distant.
There was only one letter in the mailboxand it was for Sophie. The white
envelope read: Sophie Amundsen, 3 Clover Close. That was all; it did not say who
it was from. There was no stamp on it either.
As soon as Sophie had closed the gate behind her she opened the envelope. It
contained only a slip of paper no bigger than the envelope. It read: Who are you?
Nothing else, only the three words, written by hand, and followed by a large
question mark.
She looked at the envelope again. The letter was definitely for her. Who could
have dropped it in the mailbox?
Sophie let herself quickly into the red house. As always, her cat Sherekan
managed to slink out of the bushes, jump onto the front step, and slip in through the
door before she closed it behind her.
Whenever Sophies mother was in a bad mood, she would call the house they
lived in a menagerie. A menagerie was a collection of animals. Sophie certainly had
one and was quite happy with it. It had begun with the three goldfish, Goldtop, Red
Ridinghood, and Black Jack. Next she got two budgerigars called Smitt and Smule,
then Govinda the tortoise, and finally the marmalade cat Sherekan. They had all been
given to her to make up for the fact that her mother never got home from work until
late in the afternoon and her father was away so much, sailing all over the world.
Sophie slung her schoolbag on the floor and put a bowl of cat food out for
Sherekan. Then she sat down on a kitchen stool with the mysterious letter in her hand.
Who are you?
She had no idea. She was Sophie Amundsen, of course, but who was that? She
had not really figured that outyet.
What if she had been given a different name? Anne Knutsen, for instance.
Would she then have been someone else?
She suddenly remembered that Dad had originally wanted her to be called
Lillemor. Sophie tried to imagine herself shaking hands and introducing herself as
Lillemor Amundsen, but it seemed all wrong. It was someone else who kept
introducing herself.
She jumped up and went into the bathroom with the strange letter in her hand.
She stood in front of the mirror and stared into her own eyes.
I am Sophie Amundsen, she said.
The girl in the mirror did not react with as much as a twitch. Whatever Sophie
did, she did exactly the same. Sophie tried to beat her reflection to it with a lightning
movement but the other girl was just as fast.
Who are you? Sophie asked.
She received no response to this either, but felt a momentary confusion as to
whether it was she or her reflection who had asked the question.
Sophie pressed her index finger to the nose in the mirror and said, You are
me.
As she got no answer to this, she turned the sentence around and said, I am
you.
Sophie Amundsen was often dissatisfied with her appearance. She was
frequently told that she had beautiful almond-shaped eyes, but that was probably just
something people said because her nose was too small and her mouth was a bit too
big. And her ears were much too close to her eyes. Worst of all was her straight hair,
which it was impossible to do anything with. Sometimes her father would stroke her
hair and call her the girl with the flaxen hair, after a piece of music by Claude
Debussy. It was all right for him, he was not condemned to living with this straight
dark hair. Neither mousse nor styling gel had the slightest effect on Sophies hair.
Sometimes she thought she was so ugly that she wondered if she was malformed at
birth. Her mother always went on about her difficult labor. But was that really what
determined how you looked?
Wasnt it odd that she didnt know who she was? And wasnt it unreasonable
that she hadnt been allowed to have any say in what she would look like? Her looks
had just been dumped on her. She could choose her own friends, but she certainly
hadnt chosen herself. She had not even chosen to be a human being.
What was a human being?
Sophie looked up at the girl in the mirror again.
I think Ill go upstairs and do my biology homework, she said, almost
apologetically. Once she was out in the hall, she thought, No, Id rather go out in the
garden.
Kitty, kitty, kitty!
Sophie chased the cat out onto the doorstep and closed the front door behind
her.
As she stood outside on the gravel path with the mysterious letter in her hand,
the strangest feeling came over her. She felt like a doll that had suddenly been brought
to life by the wave of a magic wand.
Wasnt it extraordinary to be in the world right now, wandering around in a
wonderful adventure!
Sherekan sprang lightly across the gravel and slid into a dense clump of redcurrant
bushes. A live cat, vibrant with energy from its white whiskers to the
twitching tail at the end of its sleek body. It was here in the garden too, but hardly
aware of it in the same way as Sophie.
As Sophie started to think about being alive, she began to realize that she would
not be alive forever. I am in the world now, she thought, but one day I shall be gone.
Was there a life after death? This was another question the cat was blissfully
unaware of.
It was not long since Sophies grandmother had died. For more than six months
Sophie had missed her every single day. How unfair that life had to end!
Sophie stood on the gravel path, thinking. She tried to think extra hard about
being alive so as to forget that she would not be alive forever. But it was impossible.
As soon as she concentrated on being alive now, the thought of dying also came into
her mind. The same thing happened the other way around: only by conjuring up an
intense feeling of one day being dead could she appreciate how terribly good it was to
be alive. It was like two sides of a coin that she kept turning over and over. And the
bigger and clearer one side of the coin became, the bigger and clearer the other side
became too.
You cant experience being alive without realizing that you have to die, she
thought. But its just as impossible to realize you have to die without thinking how
incredibly amazing it is to be alive.
Sophie remembered Granny saying something like that the day the doctor told
her she was ill. I never realized how rich life was until now, she said.
How tragic that most people had to get ill before they understood what a gift it
was to be alive. Or else they had to find a mysterious letter in the mailbox!
Perhaps she should go and see if any more letters had arrived. Sophie hurried to
the gate and looked inside the green mailbox. She was startled to find that it contained
another white envelope, exactly like the first. But the mailbox had definitely been
empty when she took the first envelope! This envelope had her name on it as well.
She tore it open and fished out a note the same size as the first one.
Where does the world come from? it said.
I dont know, Sophie thought. Surely nobody really knows. And yetSophie
thought it was a fair question. For the first time in her life she felt it wasnt right to
live in the world without at least inquiring where it came from.
The mysterious letters had made Sophies head spin. She decided to go and sit
in the den.
The den was Sophies top secret hiding place. It was where she went when she
was terribly angry, terribly miserable, or terribly happy. Today she was simply confused.
* * *
The red house was surrounded by a large garden with lots of flowerbeds, fruit
bushes, fruit trees of different kinds, a spacious lawn with a glider and a little gazebo
that Granddad had built for Granny when she lost their first child a few weeks after it
was born. The childs name was Marie. On her gravestone were the words: Little
Marie to us came, greeted us, and left again.
Down in a corner of the garden behind all the raspberry bushes was a dense
thicket where neither flowers nor berries would grow. Actually, it was an old hedge
that had once marked the boundary to the woods, but because nobody had trimmed it
for the last twenty years it had grown into a tangled and impenetrable mass. Granny
used to say the hedge made it harder for the foxes to take the chickens during the war,
when the chickens had free range of the garden.
To everyone but Sophie, the old hedge was just as useless as the rabbit hutches
at the other end of the garden. But that was only because they hadnt discovered
Sophies secret.
Sophie had known about the little hole in the hedge for as long as she could
remember. When she crawled through it she came into a large cavity between the
bushes. It was like a little house. She knew nobody would find her there.
Clutching the two envelopes in her hand, Sophie ran through the garden,
crouched down on all fours, and wormed her way through the hedge. The den was
almost high enough for her to stand upright, but today she sat down on a clump of
gnarled roots. From there she could look out through tiny peepholes between the
twigs and leaves. Although none of the holes was bigger than a small coin, she had a
good view of the whole garden. When she was little she used to think it was fun to
watch her mother and father searching for her among the trees.
Sophie had always thought the garden was a world of its own. Each time she
heard about the Garden of Eden in the Bible it reminded her of sitting here in the den,
surveying her own little paradise.
Where does the world come from?
She hadnt the faintest idea. Sophie knew that the world was only a small planet
in space. But where did space come from?
It was possible that space had always existed, in which case she would not also
need to figure out where it came from. But could anything have always existed?
Something deep down inside her protested at the idea. Surely everything that exists
must have had a beginning? So space must sometime have been created out of something
else.
But if space had come from something else, then that something else must also
have come from something. Sophie felt she was only deferring the problem. At some
point, something must have come from nothing. But was that possible? Wasnt that
just as impossible as the idea that the world had always existed?
They had learned at school that God created the world. Sophie tried to console
herself with the thought that this was probably the best solution to the whole problem.
But then she started to think again. She could accept that God had created space, but
what about God himself? Had he created himself out of nothing? Again there was
something deep down inside her that protested. Even though God could create all
kinds of things, he could hardly create himself before he had a self to create with.
So there was only one possibility left: God had always existed. But she had already
rejected that possibility! Everything that existed had to have a beginning.
Oh, drat!
She opened the two envelopes again.
Who are you?
Where does the world come from?
What annoying questions! And anyway where did the letters come from? That
was just as mysterious, almost.
Who had jolted Sophie out of her everyday existence and suddenly brought her
face to face with the great riddles of the universe?
For the third time Sophie went to the mailbox. The mailman had just delivered
the days mail. Sophie fished out a bulky pile of junk mail, periodicals, and a couple
of letters for her mother. There was also a postcard of a tropical beach. She turned the
card over. It had a Norwegian stamp on it and was postmarked UN Battalion. Could
it be from Dad? But wasnt he in a completely different place? It wasnt his
handwriting either.
Sophie felt her pulse quicken a little as she saw who the postcard was addressed
to: Hilde Moller Knag, c/o Sophie Amundsen, 3 Clover Close ... The rest of the
address was correct. The card read:
Dear Hilde, Happy 15th birthday! As Im sure youll understand, I want to give
you a present that will help you grow. Forgive me for sending the card c/o Sophie. It
was the easiest way. Love from Dad.
Sophie raced back to the house and into the kitchen. Her mind was in a turmoil.
Who was this Hilde, whose fifteenth birthday was just a month before her own?
Sophie got out the telephone book. There were a lot of people called Moller,
and quite a few called Knag. But there was nobody in the entire directory called
Moller Knag.
She examined the mysterious card again. It certainly seemed genuine enough; it
had a stamp and a postmark.
Why would a father send a birthday card to Sophies address when it was quite
obviously intended to go somewhere else? What kind of father would cheat his own
daughter of a birthday card by purposely sending it astray? How could it be the
easiest way? And above all, how was she supposed to trace this Hilde person?
So now Sophie had another problem to worry about. She tried to get her
thoughts in order:
This afternoon, in the space of two short hours, she had been presented with
three problems. The first problem was who had put the two white envelopes in her
mailbox. The second was the difficult questions these letters contained. The third
problem was who Hilde Moller Knag could be, and why Sophie had been sent her
birthday card. She was sure that the three problems were interconnected in some way.
They had to be, because until today she had lived a perfectly ordinary life.
The Top Hat
 the only thing we require to be good philosophers is the faculty of wonder...
Sophie was sure she would hear from the anonymous letter writer again. She
decided not to tell anyone about the letters for the time being.
At school she had trouble concentrating on what the teachers said. They seemed
to talk only about unimportant things. Why couldnt they talk about what a human
being isor about what the world is and how it came into being?
For the first time she began to feel that at school as well as everywhere else
people were only concerned with trivialities. There were major problems that needed
to be solved.
Did anybody have answers to these questions? Sophie felt that thinking about
them was more important than memorizing irregular verbs.
When the bell rang after the last class, she left the school so fast that Joanna had
to run to catch up with her.
After a while Joanna said, Do you want to play cards this evening?
Sophie shrugged her shoulders.
Im not that interested in card games any more.
Joanna looked surprised.
Youre not? Lets play badminton then.
Sophie stared down at the pavementthen up at her friend.
I dont think Im that interested in badminton either.
Youre kidding!
Sophie noticed the touch of bitterness in Joannas tone.
Do you mind telling me whats suddenly so important?
Sophie just shook her head. Its ... its a secret.
Yuck! Youre probably in love!
The two girls walked on for a while without saying anything. When they got to
the soccer field Joanna said, Im going across the field.
Across the field! It was the quickest way for Joanna, but she only went that way
when she had to hurry home in time for visitors or a dental appointment.
Sophie regretted having been mean to her. But what else could she have said?
That she had suddenly become so engrossed in who she was and where the world
came from that she had no time to play badminton? Would Joanna have understood?
Why was it so difficult to be absorbed in the most vital and, in a way, the most
natural of all questions?
She felt her heart beating faster as she opened the mailbox. At first she found
only a letter from the bank and some big brown envelopes for her mother. Darn!
Sophie had been looking forward to getting another letter from the unknown sender.
As she closed the gate behind her she noticed her own name on one of the big
envelopes. Turning it over, she saw written on the back: Course in Philosophy.
Handle with care.
Sophie ran up the gravel path and flung her schoolbag onto the step. Stuffing
the other letters under the doormat, she ran around into the back garden and sought
refuge in the den. This was the only place to open the big letter.
Sherekan came jumping after her but Sophie had to put up with that. She knew
the cat would not give her away.
Inside the envelope there were three typewritten pages held together with a
paper clip. Sophie began to read.
WHAT IS PHILOSOPHY?
Dear Sophie,
Lots of people have hobbies. Some people collect old coins or foreign
stamps, some do needlework, others spend most of their spare time on a
particular sport.
A lot of people enjoy reading. But reading tastes differ widely. Some
people only read newspapers or comics, some like reading novels, while
others prefer books on astronomy, wildlife, or technological discoveries.
If I happen to be interested in horses or precious stones, I cannot expect
everyone else to share my enthusiasm. If I watch all the sports programs on
TV with great pleasure, I must put up with the fact that other people find
sports boring.
Is there nothing that interests us all? Is there nothing that concerns
everyoneno matter who they are or where they live in the world? Yes, dear
Sophie, there are questions that certainly should interest everyone. They are
precisely the questions this course is about.
What is the most important thing in life? If we ask someone living on the
edge of starvation, the answer is food. If we ask someone dying of cold, the
answer is warmth. If we put the same question to someone who feels lonely
and isolated, the answer will probably be the company of other people.
But when these basic needs have been satisfiedwill there still be
something that everybody needs? Philosophers think so. They believe that
man cannot live by bread alone. Of course everyone needs food. And
everyone needs love and care. But there is something elseapart from that
which everyone needs, and that is to figure out who we are and why we are
here.
Being interested in why we are here is not a casual interest like
collecting stamps. People who ask such questions are taking part in a debate
that has gone on as long as man has lived on this planet. How the universe,
the earth, and life came into being is a bigger and more important question
than who won the most gold medals in the last Olympics.
The best way of approaching philosophy is to ask a few philosophical
questions:
How was the world created? Is there any will or meaning behind what
happens? Is there a life after death? How can we answer these questions?
And most important, how ought we to live? People have been asking these
questions throughout the ages. We know of no culture which has not
concerned itself with what man is and where the world came from.
Basically there are not many philosophical questions to ask. We have
already asked some of the most important ones. But history presents us with
many different answers to each question. So it is easier to ask philosophical
questions than to answer them.
Today as well each individual has to discover his own answer to these
same questions. You cannot find out whether there is a God or whether there
is life after death by looking in an encyclopedia. Nor does the encyclopedia
tell us how we ought to live. However, reading what other people have
believed can help us formulate our own view of life.
Philosophers search for the truth resembles a detective story. Some
think Andersen was the murderer, others think it was Nielsen or Jensen. The
police are sometimes able to solve a real crime. But it is equally possible that
they never get to the bottom of it, although there is a solution somewhere. So
even if it is difficult to answer a question, there may be oneand only one
right answer. Either there is a kind of existence after deathor there is not.
A lot of age-old enigmas have now been explained by science. What the
dark side of the moon looks like was once shrouded in mystery. It was not the
kind of thing that could be solved by discussion, it was left to the imagination
of the individual. But today we know exactly what the dark side of the moon
looks like, and no one can believe any longer in the Man in the Moon, or that
the moon is made of green cheese.
A Greek philosopher who lived more than two thousand years ago
believed that philosophy had its origin in mans sense of wonder. Man thought
it was so astonishing to be alive that philosophical questions arose of their
own accord.
It is like watching a magic trick. We cannot understand how it is done.
So we ask: how can the magician change a couple of white silk scarves into a
live rabbit?
A lot of people experience the world with the same incredulity as when a
magician suddenly pulls a rabbit out of a hat which has just been shown to
them empty.
In the case of the rabbit, we know the magician has tricked us. What we
would like to know is just how he did it. But when it comes to the world its
somewhat different. We know that the world is not all sleight of hand and
deception because here we are in it, we are part of it. Actually, we are the
white rabbit being pulled out of the hat. The only difference between us and
the white rabbit is that the rabbit does not realize it is taking part in a magic
trick. Unlike us. We feel we are part of something mysterious and we would
like to know how it all works.
P.S. As far as the white rabbit is concerned, it might be better to
compare it with the whole universe. We who live here are microscopic insects
existing deep down in the rabbits fur. But philosophers are always trying to
climb up the fine hairs of the fur in order to stare right into the magicians
eyes.
Are you still there, Sophie? To be continued . . .
Sophie was completely exhausted. Still there? She could not even remember if
she had taken the time to breathe while she read.
Who had brought this letter? It couldnt be the same person who had sent the
birthday card to Hilde Moller Knag because that card had both a stamp and a postmark.
The brown envelope had been delivered by hand to the mailbox exactly like the
two white ones.
Sophie looked at her watch. It was a quarter to three. Her mother would not be
home from work for over two hours.
Sophie crawled out into the garden again and ran to the mailbox. Perhaps there
was another letter.
She found one more brown envelope with her name on it. This time she looked
all around but there was nobody in sight. Sophie ran to the edge of the woods and
looked down the path.
No one was there. Suddenly she thought she heard a twig snap deep in the
woods. But she was not completely sure, and anyway it would be pointless to chase
after someone who was determined to get away.
Sophie let herself into the house. She ran upstairs to her room and took out a big
cookie tin full of pretty stones. She emptied the stones onto the floor and put both
large envelopes into the tin. Then she hurried out into the garden again, holding the
tin securely with both hands. Before she went she put some food out for Sherekan.
Kitty, kitty, kitty!
Once back in the den she opened the second brown envelope and drew out the
new typewritten pages. She began to read.
A STRANGE CREATURE
Hello again! As you see, this short course in philosophy will come in
handy-sized portions. Here are a few more introductory remarks:
Did I say that the only thing we require to be good philosophers is the
faculty of wonder? If I did not, I say it now: THE ONLY THING WE REQUIRE
TO BE GOOD PHILOSOPHERS IS THE FACULTY OF WONDER.
Babies have this faculty. That is not surprising. After a few short months
in the womb they slip out into a brand-new reality. But as they grow up the
faculty of wonder seems to diminish. Why is this? Do you know?
If a newborn baby could talk, it would probably say something about
what an extraordinary world it had come into. We see how it looks around and
reaches out in curiosity to everything it sees.
As words are gradually acquired, the child looks up and says Bow-wow
every time it sees a dog. It jumps up and down in its stroller, waving its arms:
Bow-wow! Bow-wow! We who are older and wiser may feel somewhat
exhausted by the childs enthusiasm. All right, all right, its a bow-wow, we
say, unimpressed. Please sit still. We are not enthralled. We have seen a
dog before.
This rapturous performance may repeat itself hundreds of times before
the child learns to pass a dog without going crazy. Or an elephant, or a
hippopotamus. But long before the child learns to talk properlyand Ion
before it learns to think philosophicallythe world we have become a habit.
A pity, if you ask me.
My concern is that you do not grow up to be one of those people who
take the world for granted, Sophie dear. So just to make sure, we are going to
do a couple of experiments in thought before we begin on the course itself.
Imagine that one day you are out for a walk in the woods. Suddenly you
see a small spaceship on the path in front of you. A tiny Martian climbs out of
the spaceship and stands on the ground looking up at you . . .
What would you think? Never mind, its not important. But have you ever
given any thought to the fact that you are a Martian yourself?
It is obviously unlikely that you will ever stumble upon a creature from
another planet. We do not even know that there is life on other planets. But
you might stumble upon yourself one day. You might suddenly stop short and
see yourself in a completely new light. On just such a walk in the woods.
I am an extraordinary being, you think. I am a mysterious creature.
You feel as if you are waking from an enchanted slumber. Who am I?
you ask. You know that you are stumbling around on a planet in the universe.
But what is the universe?
If you discover yourself in this manner you will have discovered
something as mysterious as the Martian we just mentioned. You will not only
have seen a being from outer space. You will feel deep down that you are
yourself an extraordinary being.
Do you follow me, Sophie? Lets do another experiment in thought:
One morning, Mom, Dad, and little Thomas, aged two or three, are
having breakfast in the kitchen. After a while Mom gets up and goes over to
the kitchen sink, and Dadyes, Dadflies up and floats around under the
ceiling while Thomas sits watching. What do you think Thomas says?
Perhaps he points up at his father and says: Daddys flying! Thomas will
certainly be astonished, but then he very often is. Dad does so many strange
things that this business of a little flight over the breakfast table makes no
difference to him. Every day Dad shaves with a funny machine, sometimes he
climbs onto the roof and turns the TV aerialor else he sticks his head under
the hood of the car and comes up black in the face.
Now its Moms turn. She hears what Thomas says and turns around
abruptly. How do you think she reacts to the sight of Dad floating nonchalantly
over the kitchen table?
She drops the jam jar on the floor and screams with fright. She may
even need medical attention once Dad has returned respectably to his chair.
(He should have learned better table manners by now!) Why do you think
Thomas and his mother react so differently?
It all has to do with habit. (Note this!) Mom has learned that people
cannot fly. Thomas has not. He still isnt certain what you can and cannot do
in this world.
But what about the world itself, Sophie? Do you think it can do what it
does? The world is also floating in space.
Sadly it is not only the force of gravity we get used to as we grow up.
The world itself becomes a habit in no time at all. It seems as if in the process
of growing up we lose the ability to wonder about the world. And in doing so,
we lose something centralsomething philosophers try to restore. For
somewhere inside ourselves, something tells us that life is a huge mystery.
This is something we once experienced, long before we learned to think the
thought.
To be more precise: Although philosophical questions concern us all, we
do not all become philosophers. For various reasons most people get so
caught up in everyday affairs that their astonishment at the world gets pushed
into the background. (They crawl deep into the rabbits fur, snuggle down
comfortably, and stay there for the rest of their lives.)
To children, the world and everything in it is new, something that gives
rise to astonishment. It is not like that for adults. Most adults accept the world
as a matter of course.
This is precisely where philosophers are a notable exception. A
philosopher never gets quite used to the world. To him or her, the world
continues to seem a bit unreasonablebewildering, even enigmatic.
Philosophers and small children thus have an important faculty in common.
You might say that throughout his life a philosopher remains as thin-skinned
as a child.
So now you must choose, Sophie. Are you a child who has not yet
become world-weary? Or are you a philosopher who will vow never to
become so?
If you just shake your head, not recognizing yourself as either a child or
a philosopher, then you have gotten so used to the world that it no longer
astonishes you. Watch out! You are on thin ice. And this is why you are
receiving this course in philosophy, just in case. I will not allow you, of all
people, to join the ranks of the apathetic and the indifferent. I want you to
have an inquiring mind.
The whole course is free of charge, so you get no money back if you do
not complete it. If you choose to break off the course you are free to do so. In
that case you must leave a message for me in the mailbox. A live frog would
be eminently suitable. Something green, at least, otherwise the mailman
might get scared.
To summarize briefly: A white rabbit is pulled out of a top hat. Because it
is an extremely large rabbit, the trick takes many billions of years. All mortals
are born at the very tip of the rabbits fine hairs, where they are in a position to
wonder at the impossibility of the trick. But as they grow older they work
themselves ever deeper into the fur. And there they stay. They become so
comfortable they never risk crawling back up the fragile hairs again. Only
philosophers embark on this perilous expedition to the outermost reaches of
language and existence. Some of them fall off, but others cling on desperately
and yell at the people nestling deep in the snug softness, stuffing themselves
with delicious food and drink.
Ladies and gentlemen, they yell, we are floating in space! But none of
the people down there care.
What a bunch of troublemakers! they say. And they keep on chatting:
Would you pass the butter, please? How much have our stocks risen today?
What is the price of tomatoes? Have you heard that Princess Di is expecting
again?
When Sophies mother got home later that afternoon, Sophie was practically in
shock. The tin containing the letters from the mysterious philosopher was safely hidden
in the den. Sophie had tried to start her homework but could only sit thinking
about what she had read.
She had never thought so hard before! She was no longer a childbut she
wasnt really grown up either. Sophie realized that she had already begun to crawl
down into the cozy rabbits fur, the very same rabbit that had been pulled from the top
hat of the universe. But the philosopher had stopped her. Heor was it a she?had
grabbed her by the back of the neck and pulled her up again to the tip of the fur where
she had played as a child. And there, on the outermost tips of the fine hairs, she was
once again seeing the world as if for the very first time.
The philosopher had rescued her. No doubt about it. The unknown letter writer
had saved her from the triviality of everyday existence.
When Mom got home at five oclock, Sophie dragged her into the living room
and pushed her into an armchair.
Momdont you think its astonishing to be alive? she began.
Her mother was so surprised that she didnt answer at first. Sophie was usually
doing her homework when she got home.
I suppose I dosometimes, she said.
Sometimes? Yes, butdont you think its astonishing that the world exists at
all?
Now look, Sophie. Stop talking like that.
Why? Perhaps you think the world is quite normal?
Well, isnt it? More or less, anyway.
Sophie saw that the philosopher was right. Grownups took the world for
granted. They had let themselves be lulled into the enchanted sleep of their humdrum
existence once and for all.
Youve just grown so used to the world that nothing surprises you any more.
What on earth are you talking about?
Im talking about you getting so used to everything. Totally dim, in other
words.
I will not be spoken to like that, Sophie!
All right, Ill put it another way. Youve made yourself comfortable deep down
in the fur of a white rabbit that is being pulled out of the universes top hat right now.
And in a minute youll put the potatoes on. Then youll read the paper and after half
an hours nap youll watch the news on TV!
An anxious expression came over her mothers face. She did indeed go into the
kitchen and put the potatoes on. After a while she came back into the living room, and
this time it was she who pushed Sophie into an armchair.
Theres something I must talk to you about, she began. Sophie could tell by
her voice that it was something serious.
You havent gotten yourself mixed up with drugs, have you, dear?
Sophie was just about to laugh, but she understood why the question was being
brought up now.
Are you nuts? she said. That only makes you duller.
No more was said that evening about either drugs or white rabbits.
The Myths
... a precarious balance between the forces of good and evil 
There was no letter for Sophie the next morning. All through the interminable
day at school she was bored stiff. She took care to be extra nice to Joanna during the
breaks. On the way home they talked about going camping as soon as the woods were
dry enough.
After what seemed an eternity she was once again at the mailbox. First she
opened a letter postmarked in Mexico. It was from her father. He wrote about how
much he was longing for home and how for the first time he had managed to beat the
Chief Officer at chess. Apart from that he had almost finished the pile of books he had
brought aboard with him after his winter leave.
And then, there it wasa brown envelope with her name on it! Leaving her
schoolbag and the rest of the mail in the house, Sophie ran to the den. She pulled out
the new typewritten pages and began to read:
THE MYTHOLOGICAL WORLD PICTURE
Hello there, Sophie! We have a lot to do, so well get started without
delay.
By philosophy we mean the completely new way of thinking that evolved
in Greece about six hundred years before the birth of Christ. Until that time
people had found answers to all their questions in various religions. These
religious explanations were handed down from generation to generation in the
form of myths. A myth is a story about the gods which sets out to explain why
life is as it is.
Over the millennia a wild profusion of mythological explanations of
philosophical questions spread across the world. The Greek philosophers
attempted to prove that these explanations were not to be trusted.
In order to understand how the early philosophers thought, we have to
understand what it was like to have a mythological picture of the world. We
can take some Nordic myths as examples. (There is no need to carry coals to
Newcastle.)
You have probably heard of Thor and his hammer. Before Christianity
came to Norway, people believed that Thor rode across the sky in a chariot
drawn by two goats. When he swung his hammer it made thunder and
lightning. The word thunder in NorwegianThor-d0nmeans Thors roar.
In Swedish, the word for thunder is aska, originally as-aka, which means
gods journey over the heavens.
When there is thunder and lightning there is also rain, which was vital to
the Viking farmers. So Thor was worshipped as the god of fertility.
The mythological explanation for rain was therefore that Thor was
swinging his hammer. And when it rained the corn germinated and thrived in
the fields.
How the plants of the field could grow and yield crops was not
understood. But it was clearly somehow connected with the rain. And since
everybody believed that the rain had something to do with Thor, he was one
of the most important of the Norse gods.
There was another reason why Thor was important, a reason related to
the entire world order.
The Vikings believed that the inhabited world was an island under
constant threat from outside dangers. They called this part of the world
Midgard, which means the kingdom in the middle. Within Midgard lay Asgard,
the domain of the gods.
Outside Midgard was the kingdom of Utgard, the domain of the
treacherous giants, who resorted to all kinds of cunning tricks to try and
destroy the world. Evil monsters like these are often referred to as the forces
of chaos. Not only in Norse mythology but in almost all other cultures, people
found that there was a precarious balance between the forces of good and
evil.
One of the ways in which the giants could destroy Midgard was by
abducting Freyja, the goddess of fertility. If they could do this, nothing would
grow in the fields and the women would no longer have children. So it was
vital to hold these giants in check.
Thor was a central figure in this battle with the giants. His hammer could
do more than make rain; it was a key weapon in the struggle against the
dangerous forces of chaos. It gave him almost unlimited power. For example,
he could hurl it at the giants and slay them. And he never had to worry about
losing it because it always came back to him, just like a boomerang.
This was the mythological explanation for how the balance of nature was
maintained and why there was a constant struggle between good and evil.
And this was precisely the kind of explanation that the philosophers rejected.
But it was not a question of explanations alone.
Mortals could not just sit idly by and wait for the gods to intervene while
catastrophes such as drought or plague loomed. They had to act for
themselves in the struggle against evil. This they did by performing various
religious ceremonies, or rites.
The most significant religious ceremony in Norse times was the offering.
Making an offering to a god had the effect of increasing that gods power. For
example, mortals had to make offerings to the gods to give them the strength
to conquer the forces of chaos. They could do this by sacrificing an animal to
the god. The offering to Thor was usually a goat. Offerings to Odin sometimes
took the form of human sacrifices.
The myth that is best known in the Nordic countries comes from the
Eddie poem The Lay of Thrym. It tells how Thor, rising from sleep, finds that
his hammer is gone. This makes him so angry that his hands tremble and his
beard shakes. Accompanied by his henchman Loki he goes to Freyja to ask if
Loki may borrow her wings so that he can fly to Jotunheim, the land of the
giants, and find out if they are the ones who have stolen Thors hammer.
At Jotunheim Loki meets Thrym, the king of the giants, who sure enough
begins to boast that he has hidden the hammer seven leagues under the
earth. And he adds that the gods will not get the hammer back until Thrym is
given Freyja as his bride.
Can you picture it, Sophie? Suddenly the good gods find themselves in
the midst of a full-blown hostage incident. The giants have seized the gods
most vital defensive weapon. This is an utterly unacceptable situation. As long
as the giants have Thors hammer, they have total control over the world of
gods and mortals. In exchange for the hammer they are demanding Freyja.
But this is equally unacceptable. If the gods have to give up their goddess of
fertilityshe who protects all lifethe grass will disappear from the fields and
all gods and mortals will die. The situation is deadlocked.
Loki returns to Asgard, so the myth goes, and tells Freyja to put on her
wedding attire for she is (alas!) to wed the king of the giants. Freyja is furious,
and says people will think she is absolutely man-crazy if she agrees to marry
a giant.
Then the god Heimdall has an idea. He suggests that Thor dress up as a
bride. With his hair up and two stones under his tunic he will look like a
woman. Understandably, Thor is not wildly enthusiastic about the idea, but he
finally accepts that this is the only way he will ever get his hammer back.
So Thor allows himself to be attired in bridal costume, with Loki as his
bridesmaid.
To put it in present-day terms, Thor and Loki are the gods anti-terrorist
squad. Disguised as women, their mission is to breach the giants stronghold
and recapture Thors hammer.
When the gods arrive at Jotunheim, the giants begin to prepare the
wedding feast. But during the feast, the brideThor, that isdevours an
entire ox and eight salmon. He also drinks three barrels of beer. This
astonishes Thrym. The true identity of the commandos is very nearly
revealed. But Loki manages to avert the danger by explaining that Freyja has
been looking forward to coming to jotunheim so much that she has not eaten
for a week.
When Thrym lifts the bridal veil to kiss the bride, he is startled to find
himself looking into Thors burning eyes. Once again Loki saves the situation
by explaining that the bride has not slept for a week because she is so excited
about the wedding. At this, Thrym commands that the hammer be brought
forth and laid in the brides lap during the wedding ceremony.
Thor roars with laughter when he is given the hammer. First he kills
Thrym with it, and then he wipes out the giants and all their kin. And thus the
gruesome hostage affair has a happy ending. Thorthe Batman or James
Bond of the godshas once again conquered the forces of evil.
So much for the myth itself, Sophie. But what is the real meaning behind
it? It wasnt made up just for entertainment. The myth also tries to explain
something. Here is one possible interpretation:
When a drought occurred, people sought an explanation of why there
was no rain. Could it be that the giants had stolen Thors hammer?
Perhaps the myth was an attempt to explain the changing seasons of
the year: in the winter Nature dies because Thors hammer is in jotunheim.
But in the spring he succeeds in winning it back. So the myth tried to give
people an explanation for something they could not understand.
But a myth was not only an explanation. People also carried out religious
ceremonies related to the myths. We can imagine how peoples response to
drought or crop failure would be to enact a drama about the events in the
myth. Perhaps a man from the village would dress up as a bridewith stones
for breastsin order to steal the hammer back from the giants. By doing this,
people were taking some action to make it rain so the crops would grow in
their fields.
There are a great many examples from other parts of the world of the
way people dramatized their myths of the seasons in order to speed up the
processes of nature.
So far we have only taken a brief glimpse at the world of Norse
mythology. But there were countless myths about Thor and Odin, Freyr and
Frey a, Hoder and Balder and many other gods. Mythologica notions of this
kind flourished all over the world until philosophers began to tamper with
them.
A mythological world picture also existed in Greece when the first
philosophy was evolving. The stories of the Greek gods had been handed
down from generation to generation for centuries. In Greece the gods were
called Zeus and Apollo, Hera and Athene, Dionysos and Ascle-pios, Heracles
and Hephaestos, to mention only a few of them.
Around 700 B.C., much of the Greek mythology was written down by
Homer and Hesiod. This created a whole new situation. Now that the myths
existed in written form, it was possible to discuss them.
The earliest Greek philosophers criticized Homers mythology because
the gods resembled mortals too much and were just as egoistic and
treacherous. For the first time it was said that the myths were nothing but
human notions.
One exponent of this view was the philosopher Xe-nophanes, who lived
from about 570 B.C. Men have created the gods in their own image, he said.
They believe the gods were born and have bodies and clothes and language
just as we have. Ethiopians believe that the gods are black and flat-nosed,
Thracians imagine them to be blue-eyed and fair-haired. If oxen, horses, and
lions could draw, they would depict gods that looked like oxen, horses, and
lions!
During that period the Greeks founded many city-states, both in Greece
itself and in the Greek colonies in Southern Italy and Asia Minor, where all
manual work was done by slaves, leaving the citizens free to devote all their
time to politics and culture.
In these city environments people began to think in a completely new
way. Purely on his own behalf, any citizen could question the way society
ought to be organized. Individuals could thus also ask philosophical questions
without recourse to ancient myths.
We call this the development from a mythological mode of thought to
one based on experience and reason. The aim of the early Greek
philosophers was to find natural, rather than supernatural, explanations for
natural processes.
Sophie left the den and wandered about in the large garden. She tried to forget
what she had learned at school, especially in science classes.
If she had grown up in this garden without knowing anything at all about nature,
how would she feel about the spring?
Would she try to invent some kind of explanation for why it suddenly started to
rain one day? Would she work out some fantasy to explain where the snow went and
why the sun rose in the morning?
Yes, she definitely would. She began to make up a story:
Winter held the land in its icy grip because the evil Muriat had imprisoned the
beautiful Princess Sikita in a cold prison. But one morning the brave Prince Bravato
came and rescued her. Sikita was so happy that she began to dance over the meadows,
singing a song she had composed inside the dank prison. The earth and the trees were
so moved that all the snow turned into tears. But then the sun came out and dried all
the tears away. The birds imitated Sikitas song, and when the beautiful princess let
down her golden tresses, a few locks of her hair fell onto the earth and turned into the
lilies of the field ...
Sophie liked her beautiful story. If she had not known any other explanation for
the changing seasons, she felt sure she would have come to believe her own story in
the end.
She understood that people had always felt a need to explain the processes of
nature. Perhaps they could not live without such explanations. And that they made up
all those myths in the time before there was anything called science.
The Natural Philosophers
 nothing can come from nothing 
When her mother got home from work that afternoon Sophie was sitting in the
glider, pondering the possible connection between the philosophy course and Hilde
Moller Knag, who would not be getting a birthday card from her father.
Her mother called from the other end of the garden, Sophie! Theres a letter for
you!
She caught her breath. She had already emptied the mailbox, so the letter had to
be from the philosopher. What on earth would she say to her mother?
Theres no stamp on it. Its probably a love letter!
Sophie took the letter.
Arent you going to open it?
She had to find an excuse.
Have you ever heard of anyone opening a love letter with her mother looking
over her shoulder?
Let her mother think it was a love letter. Although it was embarrassing enough,
it would be even worse if her mother found out that she was doing a correspondence
course with a complete stranger, a philosopher who was playing hide-and-seek with
her.
It was one of the little white envelopes. When Sophie got upstairs to her room,
she found three new questions:
Is there a basic substance that everything else is made of?
Can water turn into wine?
How can earth and water produce a live frog!
Sophie found the questions pretty stupid, but nevertheless they kept buzzing
around in her head all evening. She was still thinking about them at school the next
day, examining them one by one.
Could there be a basic substance that everything was made of? If there was
some such substance, how could it suddenly turn into a flower or an elephant?
The same objection applied to the question of whether water could turn into
wine. Sophie knew the parable of how Jesus turned water into wine, but she had never
taken it literally. And if Jesus really had turned water into wine, it was because it was
a miracle, something that could not be done normally. Sophie knew there was a lot of
water, not only in wine but in all other growing things. But even if a cucumber was 95
percent water, there must be something else in it as well, because a cucumber was a
cucumber, not water.
And then there was the question about the frog. Her philosophy teacher had this
really weird thing about frogs.
Sophie could possibly accept that a frog consisted of earth and water, in which
case the earth must consist of more than one kind of substance. If the earth consisted
of a lot of different substances, it was obviously possible that earth and water together
could produce a frog. That is, if the earth and the water went via frog spawn and
tadpoles. Because a frog could not just grow out of a cabbage patch, however much
you watered it.
When she got home from school that day there was a fat envelope waiting for
her in the mailbox. Sophie hid in the den just as she had done the other days.
THE PHILOSOPHERS PROJECT
Here we are again! Well go directly to todays lesson without detours
around white rabbits and the like.
Ill outline very broadly the way people have thought about philosophy,
from the ancient Greeks right up to our own day. But well take things in their
correct order.
Since some philosophers lived in a different ageand perhaps in a
completely different culture from oursit is a good idea to try and see what
each philosophers project is. By this I mean that we must try to grasp
precisely what it is that each particular philosopher is especially concerned
with finding out. One philosopher might want to know how plants and animals
came into being. Another might want to know whether there is a God or
whether man has an immortal soul.
Once we have determined what a particular philosophers project is, it is
easier to follow his line of thought, since no one philosopher concerns himself
with the whole of philosophy.
I said his line of thoughtreferring to the philosopher, because this is
also a story of men. Women of the past were subjugated both as females and
as thinking beings, which is sad because a great deal of very important experience
was lost as a result. It was not until this century that women really
made their mark on the history of philosophy.
I do not intend to give you any homeworkno difficult math questions,
or anything like that, and conjugating English verbs is outside my sphere of
interest. However, from time to time Ill give you a short assignment.
If you accept these conditions, well begin.
THE NATURAL PHILOSOPHERS
The earliest Greek philosophers are sometimes called natural
philosophers because they were mainly concerned with the natural world and
its processes.
We have already asked ourselves where everything comes from.
Nowadays a lot of people imagine that at some time something must have
come from nothing. This idea was not so widespread among the Greeks. For
one reason or another, they assumed that something had always existed.
How everything could come from nothing was therefore not the allimportant
question. On the other hand the Greeks marveled at how live fish
could come from water, and huge trees and brilliantly colored flowers could
come from the dead earth. Not to mention how a baby could come from its
mothers womb!
The philosophers observed with their own eyes that nature was in a
constant state of transformation. But how could such transformations occur?
How could something change from being substance to being a living
thing, for example?
All the earliest philosophers shared the belief that there had to be a
certain basic substance at the root of all change. How they arrived at this idea
is hard to say. We only know that the notion gradually evolved that there must
be a basic substance that was the hidden cause of all changes in nature.
There had to be something that all things came from and returned to.
For us, the most interesting part is actually not what solutions these
earliest philosophers arrived at, but which questions they asked and what type
of answer they were looking for. We are more interested in how they thought
than in exactly what they thought.
We know that they posed questions relating to the transformations they
could observe in the physical world. They were looking for the underlying laws
of nature. They wanted to understand what was happening around them
without having to turn to the ancient myths. And most important, they wanted
to understand the actual processes by studying nature itself. This was quite
different from explaining thunder and lightning or winter and spring by telling
stories about the gods.
So philosophy gradually liberated itself from religion. We could say that
the natural philosophers took the first step in the direction of scientific
reasoning, thereby becoming the precursors of what was to become science.
Only fragments have survived of what the natural philosophers said and
wrote. What little we know is found in the writings of Aristotle, who lived two
centuries later. He refers only to the conclusions the philosophers reached.
So we do not always know by what paths they reached these conclusions. But
what we do know enables us to establish that the earliest Greek philosophers
project concerned the question of a basic constituent substance and the
changes in nature.
THREE PHILOSOPHERS FROM MILETUS
The first philosopher we know of is Thales, who came from Miletus, a
Greek colony in Asia Minor. He traveled in many countries, including Egypt,
where he is said to have calculated the height of a pyramid by measuring its
shadow at the precise moment when the length of his own shadow was equal
to his height. He is also said to have accurately predicted a solar eclipse in
the year 585 B.C.
Thales thought that the source of all things was water. We do not know
exactly what he meant by that, he may have believed that all life originated
from waterand that all life returns to water again when it dissolves.
During his travels in Egypt he must have observed how the crops began
to grow as soon as the floods of the Nile receded from the land areas in the
Nile Delta. Perhaps he also noticed that frogs and worms appeared wherever
it had just been raining.
It is likely that Thales thought about the way water turns to ice or
vaporand then turns back into water again.
Thales is also supposed to have said that all things are full of gods.
What he meant by that we can only surmise. Perhaps, seeing how the black
earth was the source of everything from flowers and crops to insects and
cockroaches, he imagined that the earth was filled with tiny invisible lifegerms.
One thing is certainhe was not talking about Homers gods.
The next philosopher we hear of is Anaximander, who also lived in
Miletus at about the same time as Thales. He thought that our world was only
one of a myriad of worlds that evolve and dissolve in something he called the
boundless. It is not so easy to explain what he meant by the boundless, but it
seems clear that he was not thinking of a known substance in the way that
Thales had envisaged. Perhaps he meant that the substance which is the
source of all things had to be something other than the things created.
Because all created things are limited, that which comes before and after
them must be boundless. It is clear that this basic stuff could not be anything
as ordinary as water.
A third philosopher from Miletus was Anaximenes (c. 570526 B.C.).
He thought that the source of all things must be air or vapor. Anaximenes
was of course familiar with Tholes theory of water. But where does water
come from? Anaximenes thought that water was condensed air. We observe
that when it rains, water is pressed from the air. When water is pressed even
more, it becomes earth, he thought. He may have seen how earth and sand
were pressed out of melting ice. He also thought that fire was rarefied air.
According to Anaximenes, air was therefore the origin of earth, water, and fire.
It is not a far cry from water to the fruit of the earth. Perhaps
Anaximenes thought that earth, air, and fire were all necessary to the creation
of life, but that the source of all things was air or vapor. So, like Thales, he
thought that there must be an underlying substance that is the source of all
natural change.
Nothing Can Come from Nothing
These three Milesian philosophers all believed in the existence of a
single basic substance as the source of all things. But how could one
substance suddenly change into something else? We can call this the
problem of change.
From about 500 B.C., there was a group of philosophers in the Greek
colony of Elea in Southern Italy. These Eleatics were interested in this
question.
The most important of these philosophers was Parmenides (c. 540-480
B.C.). Parmenides thought that everything that exists had always existed. This
idea was not alien to the Greeks. They took it more or less for granted that
everything that existed in the world was everlasting. Nothing can come out of
nothing, thought Parmenides. And nothing that exists can become nothing.
But Parmenides took the idea further. He thought that there was no such
thing as actual change. Nothing could become anything other than it was.
Parmenides realized, of course, that nature is in a constant state of flux.
He perceived with his senses that things changed. But he could not equate
this with what his reason told him. When forced to choose between relying either
on his senses or his reason, he chose reason.
You know the expression Ill believe it when I see it. But Parmenides
didnt even believe things when he saw them. He believed that our senses
give us an incorrect picture of the world, a picture that does not tally with our
reason. As a philosopher, he saw it as his task to expose all forms of
perceptual illusion.
This unshakable faith in human reason is called rationalism. A rationalist
is someone who believes that human reason is the primary source of our
knowledge of the world.
All Things Flow
A contemporary of Parmenides was Heraditus (c. 540-480 B.C.), who
was from Ephesus in Asia Minor. He thought that constant change, or flow,
was in fact the mosf basic characteristic of nature. We could perhaps say that
Heraclitus had more faith in what he could perceive than Parmenides did.
Everything flows, said Heraclitus. Everything is in constant flux and
movement, nothing is abiding. Therefore we cannot step twice into the same
river. When I step into the river for the second time, neither I nor the river are
the same.
Heraclitus pointed out that the world is characterized by opposites. If we
were never ill, we would not know what it was to be well. If we never knew
hunger, we would take no pleasure in being full. If there were never any war,
we would not appreciate peace. And if there were no winter, we would never
see the spring.
Both good and bad have their inevitable place in the order of things,
Heraclitus believed. Without this constant interplay of opposites the world
would cease to exist.
God is day and night, winter and summer, war and peace, hunger and
satiety, he said. He used the term God, but he was clearly not referring to
the gods of the mythology. To Heraclitus, Godor the Deitywas something
that embraced the whole world. Indeed, God can be seen most clearly in the
constant transformations and contrasts of nature.
Instead of the term God, Heraclitus often used the Greek word logos,
meaning reason. Although we humans do not always think alike or have the
same degree of reason, Heraclitus believed that there must be a kind of
universal reason guiding everything that happens in nature.
This universal reason or universal law is something common to us all,
and something that everybody is guided by. And yet most people live by their
individual reason, thought Heraclitus. In general, he despised his fellow beings.
The opinions of most people, he said, are like the playthings of
infants.
So in the midst of all natures constant flux and oppo-sites, Heraclitus
saw an Entity or one-ness. This something, which was the source of
everything, he called God or logos.
Four Basic Elements
In one way, Parmenides and Heraclitus were the direct opposite of each
other. Parmenides reason made it clear that nothing could change.
Heraclitus sense perceptions made it equally clear that nature was in a
constant state of change. Which of them was right? Should we let reason
dictate or should we rely on our senses?
Parmenides and Heraclitus both say two things:
Parmenides says:
a) that nothing can change, and
b) that our sensory perceptions must therefore be unreliable. Heraclitus,
on the other hand, says:
a) that everything changes (all things flow), and
b) that our sensory perceptions are reliable.
* * *
Philosophers could hardly disagree more than that! But who was right? It
fell to Empedocles (c. 490-430 B.C.) from Sicily to lead the way out of the
tangle they had gotten themselves into.
He thought they were both right in one of their assertions but wrong in
the other.
Empedocles found that the cause of their basic disagreement was that
both philosophers had assumed the presence of only one element. If this
were true, the gap between what reason dictates and what we can see with
our own eyes would be unbridgeable.
Water obviously cannot turn into a fish or a butterfly. In fact, water
cannot change. Pure water will continue to be pure water. So Parmenides
was right in holding that nothing changes.
But at the same time Empedocles agreed with Heraclitus that we must
trust the evidence of our senses. We must believe what we see, and what we
see is precisely that nature changes.
Empedocles concluded that it was the idea of a single basic substance
that had to be rejected. Neither water nor air alone can change into a
rosebush or a butterfly. The source of nature cannot possibly be one single
element.
Empedocles believed that all in all, nature consisted of four elements, or
roots as he termed them. These four roots were earth, air, fire, and wafer.
All natural processes were due to the coming together and separating of
these four elements. For all things were a mixture of earth, air, fire, and water,
but in varying proportions. When a flower or an animal dies, he said, the four
elements separate again. We can register these changes with the naked eye.
But earth and air, fire and water remain everlasting, untouched by all the
compounds of which they are part. So it is not correct to say that everything
changes. Basically, nothing changes. What happens is that the four elements
are combined and separatedonly to be combined again.
We can make a comparison to painting. If a painter only has one color
red, for instancehe cannot paint green trees. But if he has yellow, red, blue,
and black, he can paint in hundreds of different colors because he can mix
them in varying proportions.
An example from the kitchen illustrates the same thing. If I only have
flour, I have to be a wizard to bake a cake. But if I have eggs, flour, milk, and
sugar, then I can make any number of different cakes.
It was not purely by chance that Empedocles chose earth, air, fire, and
water as natures roots. Other philosophers before him had tried to show
that the primordial substance had to be either water, air, or fire. Thales and
Anaximenes had pointed out that both water and air were essential elements
in the physical world. The Greeks believed that fire was also essential. They
observed, for example, the importance of the sun to all living things, and they
also knew that both animals and humans have body heat.
Empedocles might have watched a piece of wood burning. Something
disintegrates. We hear it crackle and splutter. That is water. Something goes
up in smoke. That is air. The fire we can see. Something also remains
when the fire is extinguished. That is the ashesor earth.
After Empedocles clarification of natures transformations as the
combination and dissolution of the four roots, something still remained to be
explained. What makes these elements combine so that new life can occur?
And what makes the mixture of, say, a flower dissolve again?
Empedocles believed that there were two different forces at work in
nature. He called them love and strife. Love binds things together, and strife
separates them.
He distinguishes between substance and force. This is worth noting.
Even today, scientists distinguish between elements and natural forces.
Modern science holds that all natural processes can be explained as the interaction
between different elements and various natural forces.
Empedocles also raised the question of what happens when we
perceive something. How can I see a flower, for example? What is it that
happens? Have you ever thought about it, Sophie?
Empedocles believed that the eyes consist of earth, air, fire, and water,
just like everything else in nature. So the earth in my eye perceives what is
of the earth in my surroundings, the air perceives what is of the air, the fire
perceives what is of fire, and the water what is of water. Had my eyes lacked
any of the four substances, I would not have seen all of nature.
Something of Everything in Everything
Anaxagoras (500-428 B.C.) was another philosopher who could not
agree that one particular basic substancewater, for instancemight be
transformed into everything we see in the natural world. Nor could he accept
that earth, air, fire, and water can be transformed into blood and bone.
Anaxagoras held that nature is built up of an infinite number of minute
particles invisible to the eye. Moreover, everything can be divided into even
smaller parts, but even in the minutest parts there are fragments of all other
things. If skin and bone are not a transformation of something else, there must
also be skin and bone, he thought, in the milk we drink and the food we eat.
~~
A couple of present-day examples can perhaps illustrate Anaxagoras
line of thinking. Modern laser technology can produce so-called holograms. If
one of these holograms depicts a car, for example, and the hologram is
fragmented, we will see a picture of the whole car even though we only have
the part of the hologram that showed the bumper. This is because the whole
subject is present in every tiny part.
In a sense, our bodies are built up in the same way. If I loosen a skin cell
from my finger, the nucleus will contain not only the characteristics of my skin:
the same cell will also reveal what kind of eyes I have, the color of my hair,
the number and type of my fingers, and so on. Every cell of the human body
carries a blueprint of the way all the other cells are constructed. So there is
something of everything in every single cell. The whole exists in each tiny
part.
Anaxagoras called these minuscule particles which have something of
everything in them seeds.
Remember that Empedocles thought that it was love that joined the
elements together in whole bodies. Anaxagoras also imagined order as a
kind of force, creating animals and humans, flowers and trees. He called this
force mind or intelligence (nous).
Anaxagoras is also interesting because he was the first philosopher we
hear of in Athens. He was from Asia Minor but he moved to Athens at the age
of forty. He was later accused of atheism and was ultimately forced to leave
the city. Among other things, he said that the sun was not a god but a red-hot
stone, bigger than the entire Peloponnesian peninsula.
Anaxagoras was generally very interested in astronomy. He believed
that all heavenly bodies were made of the same substance as Earth. He
reached this conclusion after studying a meteorite. This gave him the idea that
there could be human life on other planets. He also pointed out that the Moon
has no light of its ownits light comes from Earth, he said. He thought up an
explanation for solar eclipses as well.
P.S. Thank you for your attention, Sophie. It is not unlikely that you will
need to read this chapter two or three times before you understand it all. But
understanding will always require some effort. You probably wouldnt admire a
friend who was good at everything if it cost her no effort.
The best solution to the question of basic substance and the
transformations in nature must wait until tomorrow, when you will meet
Democritus. Ill say no more!
Sophie sat in the den looking out into the garden through a little hole in the
dense thicket. She had to try and sort out her thoughts after all she had read.
It was as clear as daylight that plain water could never turn into anything other
than ice or steam. Water couldnt even turn into a watermelon, because even watermelons
consisted of more than just water. But she was only sure of that because
thats what she had learned. Would she be absolutely certain, for example, that ice
was only water if that wasnt what she had learned? At least, she would have to have
studied very closely how water froze to ice and melted again.
Sophie tried once again to use her own common sense, and not to think about
what she had learned from others.
Parmenides had refused to accept the idea of change in any form. And the more
she thought about it, the more she was convinced that, in a way, he had been right.
His intelligence could not accept that something could suddenly transform itself
into something completely different. It must have taken quite a bit of courage to
come right out and say it, because it meant denying all the natural changes that people
could see for themselves. Lots of people must have laughed at him.
And Empedocles must have been pretty smart too, when he proved that the
world had to consist of more than one single substance. That made all the transformations
of nature possible without anything actually changing.
The old Greek philosopher had found that out just by reasoning. Of course he
had studied nature, but he didnt have the equipment to do chemical analysis the way
scientists do nowadays.
Sophie was not sure whether she really believed that the source of everything
actually was earth, air, fire, and water. But after all, what did that matter? In principle,
Empedocles was right. The only way we can accept the transformations we can see
with our own eyeswithout losing our reasonis to admit the existence of more than
one single basic substance.
Sophie found philosophy doubly exciting because she was able to follow all the
ideas by using her own common sensewithout having to remember everything she
had learned at school. She decided that philosophy was not something you can learn;
but perhaps you can learn to think philosophically.
Democritus
the most ingenious toy in the world
Sophie put all the typed pages from the unknown philosopher back into the
cookie tin and put the lid on it. She crawled out of the den and stood for a while
looking across the garden. She thought about what happened yesterday. Her mother
had teased her about the love letter again at breakfast this morning. She walked
quickly over to the mailbox to prevent the same thing from happening today. Getting
a love letter two days in a row would be doubly embarrassing.
There was another little white envelope! Sophie began to discern a pattern in the
deliveries: every afternoon she would find a big brown envelope. While she read the
contents, the philosopher would sneak up to the mailbox with another little white
envelope.
So now Sophie would be able to find out who he was. If it was a he! She had a
good view of the mailbox from her room. If she stood at the window she would see
the mysterious philosopher. White envelopes dont just appear out of thin air!
Sophie decided to keep a careful watch the following day. Tomorrow was
Friday and she would have the whole weekend ahead of her.
She went up to her room and opened the envelope. There was only one question
today, but it was even dumber than the previous three:
Why is Lego the most ingenious toy in the world?
For a start, Sophie was not at all sure she agreed that it was. It was years since
she had played with the little plastic blocks. Moreover she could not for the life of her
see what Lego could possibly have to do with philosophy.
But she was a dutiful student. Rummaging on the top shelf of her closet, she
found a bag full of Lego blocks of all shapes and sizes.
For the first time in ages she began to build with them. As she worked, some
ideas began to occur to her about the blocks.
They are easy to assemble, she thought. Even though they are all different, they
all fit together. They are also unbreakable. She couldnt ever remember having seen a
broken Lego block. All her blocks looked as bright and new as the day they were
bought, many years ago. The best thing about them was that with Lego she could construct
any kind of object. And then she could separate the blocks and construct
something new.
What more could one ask of a toy? Sophie decided that Lego really could be
called the most ingenious toy in the world. But what it had to do with philosophy was
beyond her.
She had nearly finished constructing a big dolls house. Much as she hated to
admit it, she hadnt had as much fun in ages.
Why did people quit playing when they grew up?
When her mother got home and saw what Sophie had been doing, she blurted
out, What fun! Im so glad youre not too grown up to play!
Im not playing! Sophie retorted indignantly, Im doing a very complicated
philosophical experiment!
Her mother signed deeply. She was probably thinking about the white rabbit
and the top hat.
When Sophie got home from school the following day, there were several more
pages for her in a big brown envelope. She took them upstairs to her room. She could
not wait to read them, but she had to keep her eye on the mailbox at the same time.
THE ATOM THEORY
Here I am again, Sophie. Today you are going to hear about the last of
the great natural philosophers. His name is Democritus (c. 460-370 B.C.) and
he was from the little town of Abdera on the northern Aegean coast.
If you were able to answer the question about Lego blocks without
difficulty, you should have no problem understanding what this philosophers
project was.
Democritus agreed with his predecessors that transformations in nature
could not be due to the fact that anything actually changed. He therefore
assumed that everything was built up of tiny invisible blocks, each of which
was eternal and immutable. Democritus called these smallest units atoms.
The word a-tom means un-cuttable. For Democritus it was allimportant
to establish that the constituent parts that everything else was
composed of could not be divided indefinitely into smaller parts. If this were
possible, they could not be used as blocks. If atoms could eternally be broken
down into ever smaller parts, nature would begin to dissolve like constantly
diluted soup.
Moreover, natures blocks had to be eternalbecause nothing can come
from nothing. In this, he agreed with Parmenides and the Eleatics. Also, he
believed that all atoms were firm and solid. But they could not all be the same.
If all atoms were identical, there would still be no satisfactory explanation of
how they could combine to form everything from poppies and olive trees to
goatskin and human hair.
Democritus believed that nature consisted of an unlimited number and
variety of atoms. Some were round and smooth, others were irregular and
jagged. And precisely because they were so different they could join together
into all kinds of different bodies. But however infinite they might be in number
and shape, they were all eternal, immutable, and indivisible.
When a bodya tree or an animal, for instancedied and disintegrated,
the atoms dispersed and could be used again in new bodies. Atoms moved
around in space, but because they had hooks and barbs, they could join
together to form all the things we see around us.
So now you see what I meant about Lego blocks. They have more or
less the same properties as those which Democritus ascribed to atoms. And
that is what makes them so much fun to build with. They are first and foremost
indivisible. Then they have different shapes and sizes. They are solid and
impermeable. They also have hooks and barbs so that they can be
connected to form every conceivable figure. These connections can later be
broken again so that new figures can be constructed from the same blocks.
The fact that they can be used over and over is what has made Lego so
popular. Each single Lego block can be part of a truck one day and part of a
castle the day after. We could also say that lego blocks are eternal. Children
of today can play with the same blocks their parents played with when they
were little.
We can form things out of clay too, but clay cannot be used over and
over, because it can be broken up into smaller and smaller pieces. These tiny
pieces can never be joined together again to make something else.
Today we can establish that Democritus atom theory was more or less
correct. Nature really is built up of different atoms that join and separate
again. A hydrogen atom in a cell at the end of my nose was once part of an
elephants trunk. A carbon atom in my cardiac muscle was once in the tail of a
dinosaur.
In our own time, however, scientists have discovered that atoms can be
broken into smaller elemental particles. We call these elemental particles
protons, neutrons, and electrons. These will possibly some day be broken into
even lesser particles. But physicists agree that somewhere along the line
there has to be a limit. There has to be a minimal part of which nature
consists.
Democritus did not have access to modern electronic apparatus. His
only proper equipment was his mind. But reason left him no real choice. Once
it is accepted that nothing can change, that nothing can come out of nothing,
and that nothing is ever lost, then nature must consist of infinitesimal blocks
that can join and separate again.
Democritus did not believe in any force or soul that could intervene in
natural processes. The only things that existed, he believed, were atoms and
the void. Since he believed in nothing but material things, we call him a
materialist.
According to Democritus, there is no conscious design in the
movement of atoms. In nature, everything happens quite mechanically. This
does not mean that everything happens randomly, for everything obeys the
inevitable laws of necessity. Everything that happens has a natural cause, a
cause that is inherent in the thing itself. Democritus once said that he would
rather discover a new cause of nature than be the King of Persia.
The atom theory also explains our sense perception, thought
Democritus. When we sense something, it is due to the movement of atoms in
space. When I see the moon, it is because moon atoms penetrate my eye.
But what about the soul, then? Surely that could not consist of atoms,
of material things? Indeed it could. Democritus believed that the soul was
made up of special round, smooth soul atoms. When a human being died,
the soul atoms flew in all directions, and could then become part of a new soul
formation.
This meant that human beings had no immortal soul, another belief that
many people share today. They believe, like Democritus, that soul is
connected with brain, and that we cannot have any form of consciousness
once the brain disintegrates.
Democrituss atom theory marked the end of Greek natural philosophy
for the time being. He agreed with ,Her-aclitus that everything in nature
flowed, since Torms come and go. But behind everything that flowed there
were some eternal and immutable things that did not flow. Democritus called
them atoms.
During her reading Sophie glanced out of the window several times to see
whether her mysterious correspondent had turned up at the mailbox. Now she just sat
staring down the road, thinking about what she had read. She felt that Democrituss
ideas had been so simple and yet so ingenious. He had discovered the real solution to
the problem of basic substance and transformation. This problem had been so
complicated that philosophers had gone around puzzling over it for generations. And
in the end Democritus had solved it on his own by using his common sense.
Sophie could hardly help smiling. It had to be true that nature was built up of
small parts that never changed. At the same time Heraclitus was obviously right in
thinking that all forms in nature flow. Because everybody dies, animals die, even a
mountain range slowly disintegrates. The point was that the mountain range is made
up of tiny indivisible parts that never break up.
At the same time Democritus had raised some new questions. For example, he
had said that everything happened mechanically. He did not accept that there was any
spiritual force in lifeunlike Empedocles and An-axagoras. Democritus also believed
that man had no immortal soul.
Could she be sure of that?
She didnt know. But then she had only just begun the philosophy course.
Fate
 the fortune-teller is trying to foresee something that is really quite
unforeseeable ...
Sophie had been keeping her eye on the mailbox while she read about
Democritus. But just in case, she decided nevertheless to take a stroll down to the
garden gate.
When she opened the front door she saw a small envelope on the front step.
And sure enoughit was addressed to Sophie Amundsen.
So he had tricked her! Today of all days, when she had kept such careful watch
on the mailbox, the mystery man had sneaked up to the house from a different angle
and just laid the letter on the step before making off into the woods again. Drat!
How did he know that Sophie was watching the mailbox today? Had he seen
her at the window? Anyway, she was glad to find the letter before her mother arrived.
Sophie went back to her room and opened the letter. The white envelope was a
bit wet around the edges, and had two little holes in it. Why was that? It had not
rained for several days.
The little note inside read:
Do you believe in Fate?
Is sickness the punishment of the gods?
What forces govern the course of history?
Did she believe in Fate? She was not at all sure. But she knew a lot of people
who did. There was a girl in her class who read horoscopes in magazines. But if they
believed in astrology, they probably believed in Fate as well, because astrologers
claimed that the position of the stars influenced peoples lives on Earth.
If you believed that a black cat crossing your path meant bad luckwell, then
you believed in Fate, didnt you? As she thought about it, several more examples of
fatalism occurred to her. Why do so many people knock on wood, for example? And
why was Friday the thirteenth an unlucky day? Sophie had heard that lots of hotels
had no room number 13. It had to be because so many people were superstitious.
Superstitious. What a strange word. If you believed in Christianity or Islam, it
was called faith. But if you believed in astrology or Friday the thirteenth it was
superstition! Who had the right to call other peoples belief superstition?
Sophie was sure of one thing, though. Democritus had not believed in fate. He
was a materialist. He had only believed in atoms and empty space.
Sophie tried to think about the other questions on the note.
Is sickness the punishment of the gods? Surely nobody believed that
nowadays? But it occurred to her that many people thought it helped to pray for
recovery, so at any rate they must believe that God had some power over peoples
health.
The last question was harder to answer. Sophie had never given much thought
to what governed the course of history. It had to be people, surely? If it was God or
Fate, people had no free will.
The idea of free will made Sophie think of something else. Why should she put
up with this mysterious philosopher playing cat and mouse with her? Why couldnt
she write a letter to him. He (or she) would quite probably put another big envelope in
the mailbox during the night or sometime tomorrow morning. She would see to it that
there was a letter ready for this person.
Sophie began right away. It was difficult to write to someone she had never
seen. She didnt even know if it was a man or a woman. Or if he or she was old or
young. For that matter, the mysterious philosopher could even be someone she
already knew. She wrote:
Most respected philosopher, Your generous correspondence course in
philosophy is greatly appreciated by us here. But it bothers us not to know who you
are. We therefore request you to use your full name. In return we would like to extend
our hospitality should you care to corne and have coffee with us, but preferably when
my mother is at home. She is at work from 7:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. every day from
Monday to Friday. I am at school during these days, but I am always home by 2:15
p.m., except on Thursdays. I am also very good at making coffee.
Thanking you in advance, I remain
Your attentive student,
Sophie Amundsen (aged 14)
At the bottom of the page she wrote RSVP.
Sophie felt that the letter had turned out much too formal. But it was hard to
know which words to choose when writing to a person without a face. She put the
letter in a pink envelope and addressed it To the philosopher.
The problem was where to put it so her mother didnt find it. She would have to
wait for her to get home before putting it in the mailbox. And she would also have to
remember to look in the mailbox early the next morning before the newspaper arrived.
If no new letter came for her this evening or during the night, she would have to take
the pink envelope in again.
Why did it all have to be so complicated?
That evening Sophie went up to her room early, even though it was Friday. Her
mother tried to tempt her with pizza and a thriller on TV, but Sophie said she was
tired and wanted to go to bed and read. While her mother sat watching TV, she
sneaked out to the mailbox with her letter.
Her mother was clearly worried. She had started speaking to Sophie in a
different tone since the business with the white rabbit and the top hat. Sophie hated to
be a worry to her mother, but she just had to go upstairs and keep an eye on the
mailbox.
When her mother came up at about eleven oclock, Sophie was sitting at the
window staring down the road.
Youre not still sitting there staring at the mailbox! she said.
I can look at whatever I like.
I really think you must be in love, Sophie. But if he is going to bring you
another letter, he certainly wont come in the middle of the night.
Yuck! Sophie loathed all that soppy talk about love. But she had to let her
mother go on believing it was true.
Is he the one who told you about the rabbit and the top hat? her mother asked.
Sophie nodded.
Hehe doesnt do drugs, does he?
Now Sophie felt really sorry for her mother. She couldnt go on letting her
worry this way, although it was completely nutty of her to think that just because
someone had a slightly bizarre idea he must be on something. Grownups really were
idiotic sometimes.
She said, Mom, I promise you once and for all Ill never do any of that stuff...
and he doesnt either. But he is very interested in philosophy.
Is he older than you?
Sophie shook her head.
The same age?
Sophie nodded.
Well, Im sure hes very sweet, darling. Now I think you should try and get
some sleep.
But Sophie stayed sitting by the window for what seemed like hours. At last she
could hardly keep her eyes open. It was one oclock.
She was just about to go to bed when she suddenly caught sight of a shadow
emerging from the woods.
Although it was almost dark outside, she could make out the shape of a human
figure. It was a man, and Sophie thought he looked quite old. He was certainly not her
age! He was wearing a beret of some kind.
She could have sworn he glanced up at the house, but Sophies light was not on.
The man went straight up to the mailbox and dropped a big envelope into it. As he let
go of it, he caught sight of Sophies letter. He reached down into the mailbox and
fished it up. The next minute he was walking swiftly back toward the woods. He hurried
down the woodland path and was gone.
Sophie felt her heart pounding. Her first instinct was to run after him in her
pajamas but she didnt dare run after a stranger in the middle of the night. But she did
have to go out and fetch the envelope.
After a minute or two she crept down the stairs, opened the front door quietly,
and ran to the mailbox. In a flash she was back in her room with the envelope in her
hand. She sat on her bed, holding her breath. After a few minutes had passed and all
was still quiet in the house, she opened the letter and began to read.
She knew this would not be an answer to her own letter. That could not arrive
until tomorrow.
FATE
Good morning once again, my dear Sophie. In case you should get any
ideas, let me make it quite clear that you must never attempt to check up on
me. One day we will meet, but I shall be the one to decide when and where.
And thats final. You are not going to disobey me, are you?
But to return to the philosophers. We have seen how they tried to find
natural explanations for the transformations in Nature. Previously these things
had been explained through myths.
Old superstitions had to be cleared away in other areas as well. We see
them at work in matters of sickness and health as well as in political events. In
both these areas the Greeks were great believers in fatalism.
Fatalism is the belief that whatever happens is predestined. We find this
belief all over the world, not only throughout history but in our own day as
welt. Here in the Nordic countries we find a strong belief in lagnadan, or fate,
in the old Icelandic sagas of the Edda.
We also find the belief, both in Ancient Greece and in other parts of the
world, that people could learn their fate from some form of oracle. In other
words, that the fate of a person or a country could be foreseen in various
ways.
There are still a lot of people who believe that they can tell your fortune
in the cards, read your palm, or predict your future in the stars.
A special Norwegian version of this is telling your fortune in coffee cups.
When a coffee cup is empty there are usually some traces of coffee grounds
left. These might form a certain image or patternat least, if we give our
imagination free rein. If the grounds resemble a car, it might mean that the
person who drank from the cup is going for a long drive.
Thus the fortune-teller is trying to foresee something that is really quite
unforeseeable. This is characteristic of all forms of foreseeing. And precisely
because what they see is so vague, it is hard to repudiate fortune-tellers
claims.
When we gaze up at the stars, we see a veritable chaos of twinkling
dots. Nevertheless, throughout the ages there have always been people who
believed that the stars could tell us something about our life on Earth. Even
today there are political leaders who seek the advice of astrologers before
they make any important decisions.
The Oracle at Delphi
The ancient Greeks believed that they could consult the famous oracle
at Delphi about their fate. Apollo, the god of the oracle, spoke through his
priestess Pythia, who sat on a stool over a fissure in the earth, from which
arose hypnotic vapors that put Pythia in a trance. This enabled her to be
Apollos mouthpiece. When people came to Delphi they had to present their
question to the priests of the oracle, who passed it on to Pythia. Her answer
would be so obscure or ambiguous that the priests would have to interpret it.
In that way, the ieople got the benefit of Apollos wisdom, believing that e
knew everything, even about the future.
There were many heads of state who dared not go to war or take other
decisive steps until they had consulted the oracle at Delphi. The priests of
Apollo thus functioned more or less as diplomats, or advisers. They were
experts with an intimate knowledge of the people and the country.
Over the entrance to the temple at Delphi was a famous inscription:
KNOW THYSELF! It reminded visitors that man must never believe himself to
be more than mortaland that no man can escape his destiny.
The Greeks had many stories of people whose destiny catches up with
them. As time went by, a number of playstragedieswere written about
these tragic people. The most famous one is the tragedy of King Oedipus.
History and Medicine
But Fate did not just govern the lives of individuals. The Greeks believed
that even world history was governed by Fate, and that the fortunes of war
could be swayed by the intervention of the gods. Today there are still many
people who believe that God or some other mysterious power is steering the
course of history.
But at the same time as Greek philosophers were trying to find natural
explanations for the processes of nature, the first historians were beginning to
search for natural explanations for the course of history. When a country lost
a war, the vengeance of the gods was no longer an acceptable explanation to
them. The best known Greek historians were Herodotus (484-424 B.C.) and
Thucydides (460-400 B.C.).
The Greeks also believed that sickness could be ascribed to divine
intervention. On the other hand, the gods could make people well again if they
made the appropriate sacrifices.
This idea was in no way unique to the Greeks. Before the development
of modern medicine, the most widely accepted view was that sickness was
due to supernatural causes. The word influenza actually means a malign
influence from the stars.
Even today, there are a lot of people who believe that some diseases
AIDS, for exampleare Gods punishment. Many also believe that sick
people can be cured with the help of the supernatural.
Concurrently with the new directions in Greek philosophy, a Greek
medical science arose which tried to find natural explanations for sickness
and health. The founder of Greek medicine is said to have been Hippocrates,
who was born on the island of Cos around 460 B.C.
The most essential safeguards against sickness, according to the
Hippocratic medical tradition, were moderation and a healthy lifestyle. Health
is the natural condition. When sickness occurs, it is a sign that Nature has
gone off course because of physical or mental imbalance. The road to health
for everyone is through moderation, harmony, and a sound mind in a sound
body.
There is a lot of talk today about medical ethics, which is another way
of saying that a doctor must practice medicine according to certain ethical
rules. For instance, a doctor may not give healthy people a prescription for
narcotics. A doctor must also maintain professional secrecy, which means
that he is not allowed to reveal anything a patient has told him about his
illness. These ideas go back to Hippocrates. He required his pupils to take the
following oath:
I will follow that system or regimen which, according to my ability and
judgment, I consider to be for the benefit of my patients, and abstain from
whatever is deleterious and mischievous. 1 will give no deadly medicine to
anyone if asked nor suggest any such counsel, and in like manner I will not
give to a woman the means to produce an abortion. Whenever I go into a
house, I will go for the benefit of the sick and will abstain from every voluntary
act of mischief and corruption, and further, from the seduction of females or
males, whether freemen or slaves.
Whatever, in connection with my professional practice, I see or hear
which ought not to be spoken abroad, I will keep secret. So long as I continue
to carry out this oath unviolated, may it be granted to me to enjoy life and the
practice of the art, respected by all men in all times, but should I violate this
oath, may the reverse be my lot.
Sophie awoke with a start on Saturday morning. Was it a dream or had she
really seen the philosopher?
She felt under the bed with one hand. Yesthere lay the letter that had come
during the night. It wasnt only a dream.
She had definitely seen the philosopher! And whats more, with her own eyes
she had seen him take her letter!
She crouched down on the floor and pulled out all the typewritten pages from
under the bed. But what was that? Right by the wall there was something red. A scarf,
perhaps?
Sophie edged herself in under the bed and pulled out a red silk scarf. It wasnt
hers, that was for sure!
She examined it more closely and gasped when she saw HILDE written in ink
along the seam.
Hilde! But who was Hilde? How could their paths keep crossing like this?
Socrates
wisest is she who knows she does not know
Sophie put on a summer dress and hurried down to the kitchen. Her mother was
standing by the kitchen table. Sophie decided not to say anything about the silk scarf.
Did you bring in the newspaper? she asked.
Her mother turned.
Would you get it for me?
Sophie was out of the door in a flash, down the gravel path to the mailbox.
Only the newspaper. She couldnt expect an answer so soon, she supposed. On
the front page of the paper she read something about the Norwegian UN battalion in
Lebanon.
The UN battalion ... wasnt that the postmark on the card from Hildes father?
But the postage stamp had been Norwegian. Maybe the Norwegian UN soldiers had
their own post office with them.
Youve become very interested in the newspaper, said her mother drily when
Sophie returned to the kitchen.
Luckily her mother said no more about mailboxes and stuff, either during
breakfast or later on that day. When she went shopping, Sophie took her letter about
Fate down to the den.
She was surprised to see a little white envelope beside the cookie tin with the
other letters from the philosopher. Sophie was quite sure she had not put it there.
This envelope was also wet around the edges. And it had a couple of deep holes
in it, just like the one she had received yesterday.
Had the philosopher been here? Did he know about her secret hiding place?
Why was the envelope wet?
All these questions made her head spin. She opened the letter and read the note:
Dear Sophie, I read your letter with great interest and not without some
regret. I must unfortunately disappoint you with regard to the invitation. We shall
meet one day, but it will probably be quite a while before I can come in person to
Captains Bend.
I must add that from now on I will no longer be able to deliver the letters
personally. It would be much too risky in the long run. In the future, letters will be
delivered by my little messenger. On the other hand, they will be brought directly to
the secret place in the garden.
You may continue to contact me whenever you feel the need. When you do, put
a pink envelope out with a cookie or a lump of sugar in it. When the messenger finds
it, he will bring it straight to me.
P.S. It is not pleasant to decline a young ladys invitation to coffee, but
sometimes it is a matter of necessity.
P.P.S. If you should come across a red silk scarf anywhere, please take care of
it. Sometimes personal property gets mixed up. Especially at school and places like
that, and this is a philosophy school.
Yours, Alberto Knox
Sophie had lived for almost fifteen years, and had received quite a lot of letters
in her young life, at least at Christmas and on birthdays. But this letter was the
strangest one she had ever received.
It had no postage stamp. It hadnt even been put in the mailbox. It had been
brought straight to Sophies top-secret hideout in the old hedge. The fact that it was
wet in the dry spring weather was also most mystifying.
The strangest thing of all was the silk scarf, of course. The philosopher must
have another pupil. That was it. And this other pupil had lost a red silk scarf. Right.
But how had she managed to lose it under Sophies bed?
And Alberto Knox  what kind of a name was that?
One thing was confirmedthe connection between the philosopher and Hilde
Moller Knag. But that Hildes own father was now confusing their addressesthat
was completely incomprehensible.
Sophie sat for a long time thinking about what connection there could possibly
be between Hilde and herself. Finally she gave up. The philosopher had written that
she would meet him one day. Perhaps she would meet Hilde too.
She turned the letter over. She now saw that there were some sentences written
on the back as well:
Is there such a thing as natural modesty?
Wisest is she who knows she does not know...
True insight comes from within.
He who knows what is right will do right.
Sophie knew that the short sentences that came in the white envelopes were
intended to prepare her for the next big envelope, which would arrive shortly
thereafter. She suddenly had an idea. If the messenger came to the den to deliver a
brown envelope, Sophie could simply sit and wait for him. Or was it a her? She would
definitely hang on to whoever it was until he or she told her more about the
philosopher! The letter said that the messenger was little. Could it be a child? Is
there such a thing as natural modesty? Sophie knew that modesty was an oldfashioned
word for shynessfor example, about being seen naked. But was it really
natural to be embarrassed about that? If something was natural, she supposed, it was
the same for everybody. In many parts of the world it was completely natural to be
naked. So it must be society that decides what you can and cant do. When Grandma
was young you certainly couldnt sunbathe topless. But today, most people think it is
natural, even though it is still strictly forbidden in lots of countries. Was this philosophy?
Sophie wondered.
The next sentence was: Wisest is she who knows she does not know.
Wiser than who? If the philosopher meant that someone who realized that she
didnt know everything under the sun was wiser than someone who knew just a little,
but who thought she knew a whole lotwell, that wasnt so difficult to agree with.
Sophie had never thought about it before. But the more she did, the more clearly she
saw that knowing what you dont know is also a kind of knowledge. The stupidest
thing she knew was for people to act like they knew all about things they knew
absolutely nothing about.
The next sentence was about true insight coming from within. But didnt all
knowledge come into peoples heads from the outside? On the other hand, Sophie
could remember situations when her mother or the teachers at school had tried to
teach her something that she hadnt been receptive to. And whenever she had really
learned something, it was when she had somehow contributed to it herself. Now and
then, even, she would suddenly understand a thing shed drawn a total blank on
before. That was probably what people meant by insight.
So far, so good. Sophie thought she had done reasonably well on the first three
questions. But the next statement was so odd she couldnt help smiling: He who
knows what is right will do right.
Did that mean that when a bank robber robbed a bank it was because he didnt
know any better? Sophie didnt think so.
On the contrary, she thought that both children and adults did stupid things that
they probably regretted afterwards, precisely because they had done them against their
better judgment.
While she sat thinking, she heard something rustling in the dry undergrowth on
the other side of the hedge nearest the woods. Could it be the messenger? Her heart
started beating faster. It sounded like a panting animal was coming.
The next moment a big Labrador pushed its way into the den.
In its mouth it held a big brown envelope which it dropped at Sophies feet. It
all happened so quickly that Sophie had no time to react. A second later she was
sitting with the big envelope in her handsand the golden Labrador had scampered
off into the woods again.
Once it was all over she reacted. She started to cry.
She sat like that for a while, losing all sense of time.
Then she looked up suddenly.
So that was his famous messenger! Sophie breathed a sigh of relief. Of course
that was why the white envelopes were wet around the edges and had holes in them.
Why hadnt she thought of it? Now it made sense to put a cookie or a lump of sugar in
the envelope when she wrote to the philosopher.
She may not always have been as smart as she would like, but who could have
guessed that the messenger was a trained dog! It was a bit out of the ordinary, to put it
mildly! She could certainly forget all about forcing the messenger to reveal Alberto
Knoxs whereabouts.
Sophie opened the big envelope and began to read.
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ATHENS
Dear Sophie, When you read this you may already have met Hermes. In
case you havent, Ill add that he is a dog. But dont worry. He is very goodtempered
and moreover, a good deal more intelligent than a lot of people. In
any event he never tries to give the impression of being cleverer than he is.
You may also note that his name is not without significance.
In Greek mythology, Hermes was the messenger of the gods. He was
also the god of seafarers, but we shall not bother about that, at least not for
the moment. It is more important that Hermes also gave his name to the word
hermetic, which means hidden or inaccessiblenot inappropriate for the
way Hermes takes care to keep the two of us hidden from each other.
So the messenger has herewith been introduced. Naturally he answers
to his name and is altogether very well behaved.
But to return to philosophy. We have already completed the first part of
the course. I refer to the natural philosophers and their decisive break with the
mythological world picture. Now we are going to meet the three great classical
philosophers, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Each in his own way, these
philosophers influenced the whole of European civilization.
The natural philosophers are also called the pre-Socratics, because they
lived before Socrates. Although Democritus died some years after Socrates,
all his ideas belong to pre-Socratic natural philosophy. Socrates represents a
new era, geographically as well as temporally. He was the first of the great
philosophers to be born in Athens, and both he and his two successors lived
and worked there. You may recall that Anaxagoras also lived in Athens for a
while but was hounded out because he said the sun was a red-hot stone.
(Socrates fared no better!)
From the time of Socrates, Athens was the center of Greek culture. It is
also important to note the change of character in the philosophical project
itself as it progresses from natural philosophy to Socrates. But before we
meet Socrates, let us hear a little about the so-called Sophists, who
dominated the Athenian scene at the time of Socrates.
Curtain up, Sophie! The history of ideas is like a drama in many acts.
Man at the Center
After about 450 B.C., Athens was the cultural center of the Greek world.
From this time on, philosophy took a new direction. The natural philosophers
had been mainly concerned with the nature of the physical world. This gives
them a central position in the history of science. In Athens, interest was now
focused on the individual and the individuals place in society. Gradually a
democracy evolved, with popular assemblies and courts of law.
In order for democracy to work, people had to be educated enough to
take part in the democratic process. We have seen in our own time how a
young democracy needs popular enlightenment. For the Athenians, it was first
and foremost essential to master the art of rhetoric, which means saying
things in a convincing manner.
A group of itinerant teachers and philosophers from the Greek colonies
flocked to Athens. They called themselves Sophists. The word sophist
means a wise and informed person. In Athens, the Sophists made a living out
of teaching the citizens for money.
The Sophists had one characteristic in common with the natural
philosophers: they were critical of the traditional mythology. But at the same
time the Sophists rejected what they regarded as fruitless philosophical
speculation. Their opinion was that although answers to philosophical questions
may exist, man cannot know the truth about the riddles of nature and of
the universe. In philosophy a view like this is called skepticism.
But even if we cannot know the answers to all of natures riddles, we
know that people have to learn to live together. The Sophists chose to
concern themselves with man and his place in society.
Man is the measure of all things, said the Sophist Protagoras (c. 485-
410 B.C.). By that he meant that the question of whether a thing is right or
wrong, good or bad, must always be considered in relation to a persons
needs. On being asked whether he believed in the Greek gods, he answered,
The question is complex and life is short. A person who is unable to say
categorically whether or not the gods or God exists is called an agnostic.
The Sophists were as a rule men who had traveled widely and seen
different forms of government. Both conventions and local laws in the citystates
could vary widely. This led the Sophists to raise the question of what
was natural and what was socially induced. By doing this, they paved the way
for social criticism in the city-state of Athens.
They could for example point out that the use of an expression like
natural modesty is not always defensible, for if it is natural to be modest, it
must be something you are born with, something innate. But is it really innate,
Sophieor is it socially induced? To someone who has traveled the world,
the answer should be simple: It is not naturalor innateto be afraid to
show yourself naked. Modestyor the lack of itis first and foremost a
matter of social convention.
As you can imagine, the wandering Sophists created bitter wrangling in
Athens by pointing out that there were no absolute norms for what was right
or wrong.
Socrates, on the other hand, tried to show that some such norms are in
fact absolute and universally valid.
Who Was Socrates?
Socrates (470-399 B.C.) is possibly the most enigmatic figure in the
entire history of philosophy. He never wrote a single line. Yet he is one of the
philosophers who has had the greatest influence on European thought, not
least because of the dramatic manner of his death.
We know he was born in Athens, and that he spent most of his life in the
city squares and marketplaces talking with the people he met there. The
trees in the countryside can teach me nothing, he said. He could also stand
lost in thought for hours on end.
Even during his lifetime he was considered somewhat enigmatic, and
fairly soon after his death he was held to be the founder of any number of
different philosophical schools of thought. The very fact that he was so
enigmatic and ambiguous made it possible for widely differing schools of
thought to claim him as their own.
We know for a certainty that he was extremely ugly. He was potbellied,
and had bulging eyes and a snub nose. But inside he was said to be perfectly
delightful. It was also said of him that You can seek him in the present, you
can seek him in the past, but you will never find his equal. Nevertheless he
was sentenced to death for his philosophical activities.
The life of Socrates is mainly known to us through the writings of Plato,
who was one of his pupils and who became one of the greatest philosophers
of all time. Plato wrote a number of Dialogues, or dramatized discussions on
philosophy, in which he uses Socrates as his principal character and
mouthpiece.
Since Plato is putting his own philosophy in Socrates mouth, we cannot
be sure that the words he speaks in the dialogues were ever actually uttered
by him. So it is no easy matter to distinguish between the teachings of Socrates
and the philosophy of Plato. Exactly the same problem applies to many
other historical persons who left no written accounts. The classic example, of
course, is Jesus. We cannot be certain that the historical Jesus actually
spoke the words that Matthew or Luke ascribed to him. Similarly, what the
historical Socrates actually said will always be shrouded in mystery.
But who Socrates really was is relatively unimportant. It is Platos
portrait of Socrates that has inspired thinkers in the Western world for nearly
2,500 years.
The Art of Discourse
The essential nature of Socrates art lay in the fact that he did not
appear to want to instruct people. On the contrary he gave the impression of
one desiring to learn from those he spoke with. So instead of lecturing like a
traditional schoolmaster, he discussed.
Obviously he would not have become a famous philosopher had he
confined himself purely to listening to others. Nor would he have been
sentenced to death. But he just asked questions, especially to begin a
conversation, as if he knew nothing. In the course of the discussion he would
generally get his opponents to recognize the weakness of their arguments,
and, forced into a corner, they would finally be obliged to realize what was
right and what was wrong.
Socrates, whose mother was a midwife, used to say that his art was like
the art of the midwife. She does not herself give birth to the child, but she is
there to help during its delivery. Similarly, Socrates saw his task as helping
people to give birth to the correct insight, since real understanding must
come from within. It cannot be imparted by someone else. And only the
understanding that comes from within can lead to true insight.
Let me put it more precisely: The ability to give birth is a natural
characteristic. In the same way, everybody can grasp philosophical truths if
they just use their innate reason. Using your innate reason means reaching
down inside yourself and using what is there.
By playing ignorant, Socrates forced the people he met to use their
common sense. Socrates could feign ignoranceor pretend to be dumber
than he was. We call this Socratic irony. This enabled him to continually
expose the weaknesses in peoples thinking. He was not averse to doing this
in the middle of the city square. If you met Socrates, you thus might end up
being made a fool of publicly.
So it is not surprising that, as time went by, people found him
increasingly exasperating, especially people who had status in the
community. Athens is like a sluggish horse, he is reputed to have said, and
I am the gadfly trying to sting it into life.
(What do we do with gadflies, Sophie?)
A Divine Voice
It was not in order to torment his fellow beings that Socrates kept on
stinging them. Something within him left him no choice. He always said that
he had a divine voice inside him. Socrates protested, for example, against
having any part in condemning people to death. He moreover refused to
inform on his political enemies. This was eventually to cost him his life.
In the year 399 B.C. he was accused of introducing new gods and
corrupting the youth, as well as not believing in the accepted gods. With a
slender majority, a jury of five hundred found him guilty.
He could very likely have appealed for leniency. At least he could have
saved his life by agreeing to leave Athens. But had he done this he would not
have been Socrates. He valued his conscienceand the truth higher than
life. He assured the jury that he had only acted in the best interests of the
state. He was nevertheless condemned to drink hemlock. Shortly thereafter,
he drank the poison in the presence of his friends, and died.
Why, Sophie? Why did Socrates have to die? People have been asking
this question for 2,400 years. However, he was not the only person in history
to have seen things through to the bitter end and suffered death for the sake
of their convictions.
I have mentioned Jesus already, and in fact there are several striking
parallels between them.
Both Jesus and Socrates were enigmatic personalities, also to their
contemporaries. Neither of them wrote down their teachings, so we are forced
to rely on the picture we have of them from their disciples. But we do know
that they were both masters of the art of discourse. They both spoke with a
characteristic self-assuredness that could fascinate as well as exasperate.
And not least, they both believed that they spoke on behalf of something
greater than themselves. They challenged the power of the community by
criticizing all forms of injustice and corruption. And finallytheir activities cost
them their lives.
The trials of Jesus and Socrates also exhibit clear parallels.
They could certainly both have saved themselves by appealing for
mercy, but they both felt they had a mission that would have been betrayed
unless they kept faith to the bitter end. And by meeting their death so bravely
they commanded an enormous following, also after they had died.
I do not mean to suggest that Jesus and Socrates were alike. I am
merely drawing attention to the fact that they both had a message that was
inseparably linked to their personal courage.
A Joker in Athens
Socrates, Sophie! We arent done with him yet. We have talked about
his method. But what was his philosophical project?
Socrates lived at the same time as the Sophists. Like them, he was
more concerned with man and his place in society than with the forces of
nature. As a Roman philosopher, Cicero, said of him a few hundred years
later, Socrates called philosophy down from the sky and established her in
the towns and introduced her into homes and forced her to investigate life,
ethics, good and evil.
But Socrates differed from the Sophists in one significant way. He did
not consider himself to be a sophistthat is, a learned or wise person.
Unlike the Sophists, he did not teach for money. No, Socrates called himself a
philosopher in the true sense of the word. A philosopher really means one
who loves wisdom.
Are you sitting comfortably, Sophie? Because it is central to the rest of
this course that you fully understand the difference between a sophist and a
philosopher. The Sophists took money for their more or less hairsplitting
expoundings, and sophists of this kind have come and gone from time
immemorial. I am referring to all the schoolmasters and self-opinionated
know-it-alls who are satisfied with what little they know, or who boast of knowing
a whole lot about subjects they havent the faintest notion of. You have
probably come across a few of these sophists in your young life. A real
philosopher, Sophie, is a completely different kettle of fishthe direct
opposite, in fact. A philosopher knows that in reality he knows very little. That
is why he constantly strives to achieve true insight. Socrates was one of these
rare people. He knew that he knew nothing about life and about the world.
And now comes the important part: it troubled him that he knew so little.
A philosopher is therefore someone who recognizes that there is a lot he
does not understand, and is troubled by it. In that sense, he is still wiser than
all those who brag about their knowledge of things they know nothing about.
Wisest is she who knows she does not know, I said previously. Socrates
himself said, One thing only I know, and that is that I know nothing.
Remember this statement, because it is an admission that is rare, even
among philosophers. Moreover, it can be so dangerous to say it in public that
it can cost you your life. The most subversive people are those who ask
questions. Giving answers is not nearly as threatening. Any one question can
be more explosive than a thousand answers.
You remember the story of the emperors new clothes? The emperor
was actually stark naked but none of his subjects dared say so. Suddenly a
child burst out, But hes got nothing on! That was a courageous child, Sophie.
Like Socrates, who dared tell people how little we humans know. The
similarity between children and philosophers is something we have already
talked about.
To be precise: Mankind is faced with a number of difficult questions that
we have no satisfactory answers to. So now two possibilities present
themselves: We can either fool ourselves and the rest of the world by
pretending that we know all there is to know, or we can shut our eyes to the
central issues once and for all and abandon all progress. In this sense,
humanity is divided. People are, generally speaking, either dead certain or
totally indifferent. (Both types are crawling around deep down in the rabbits
fur!)
It is like dividing a deck of cards into two piles, Sophie. You lay the black
cards in one pile and the red in the other. But from time to time a joker turns
up that is neither heart nor club, neither diamond nor spade. Socrates was
this joker in Athens. He was neither certain nor indifferent. All he knew was
that he knew nothingand it troubled him. So he became a philosopher
someone who does not give up but tirelessly pursues his quest for truth.
An Athenian is said to have asked the oracle at Delphi who the wisest
man in Athens was. The oracle answered that Socrates of all mortals was the
wisest. When Socrates heard this he was astounded, to put it mildly. (He must
have laughed, Sophie!) He went straight to the person in the city whom he,
and everyone else, thought was excessively wise. But when it turned out that
this person was unable to give Socrates satisfactory answers to his questions,
Socrates realized that the oracle had been right.
Socrates felt that it was necessary to establish a solid foundation for our
knowledge. He believed that this foundation lay in mans reason. With his
unshakable faith in human reason he was decidedly a rationalist.
The Right Insight Leads to the Right Action
As I have mentioned earlier, Socrates claimed that he was guided by a
divine inner voice, and that this conscience told him what was right. He who
knows what good is will do good, he said.
By this he meant that the right insight leads to the right action. And only
he who does right can be a virtuous man. When we do wrong it is because
we dont know any better. That is why it is so important to go on learning.
Socrates was concerned with finding clear and universally valid definitions of
right and wrong. Unlike the Sophists, he believed that the ability to distinguish
between right and wrong lies in peoples reason and not in society.
You may perhaps think this last part is a bit too obscure, Sophie. Let me
put it like this: Socrates thought that no one could possibly be happy if they
acted against their better judgment. And he who knows how to achieve happiness
will do so. Therefore, he who knows what is right will do right. Because
why would anybody choose to be unhappy?
What do you think, Sophie? Can you live a happy life if you continually
do things you know deep down are wrong? There are lots of people who lie
and cheat and speak ill of others. Are they aware that these things are not
rightor fair, if you prefer? Do you think these people are happy?
Socrates didnt.
When Sophie had read the letter, she quickly put it in the cookie tin and crawled
out into the garden. She wanted to go indoors before her mother got back with the
shopping in order to avoid any questions about where she had been. And she had
promised to do the dishes.
She had just filled the sink with water when her mother came staggering in with
two huge shopping bags. Perhaps that was why her mother said, You are rather
preoccupied these days, Sophie.
Sophie didnt know why she said it; the words just tumbled out of her mouth:
So was Socrates.
Socrates?
Her mother stared at her, wide-eyed.
It was just so sad that he had to die as a result, Sophie went on thoughtfully.
My goodness! Sophie! I dont know what Im to do!
Neither did Socrates. All he knew was that he knew nothing. And yet he was
the cleverest person in Athens.
Her mother was speechless.
Finally she said, Is this something youve learned at school?
Sophie shook her head energetically.
We dont learn anything there. The difference between schoolteachers and
philosophers is that school-teachers think they know a lot of stuff that they try to force
down our throats. Philosophers try to figure things out together with the pupils.
Now were back to white rabbits again! You know something? I demand to
know who your boyfriend really is. Otherwise Ill begin to think he is a bit disturbed.
Sophie turned her back on the dishes and pointed at her mother with the dish
mop.
Its not him whos disturbed. But he likes to disturb othersto shake them out
of their rut.
Thats enough of that! I think he sounds a bit too impertinent. Sophie turned
back to the dishes.
He is neither impertinent nor pertinent, said Sophie. But he is trying to reach
real wisdom. Thats the great difference between a real joker and all the other cards in
the deck.
Did you say joker?
Sophie nodded. Have you ever thought about the fact that there are a lot of
hearts and diamonds in a pack of cards? And a lot of spades and clubs. But theres
only one joker.
Good grief, how you talk back, Sophie!
And how you ask!
Her mother had put all the groceries away. Now she took the newspaper and
went into the living room. Sophie thought she closed the door more loudly than usual.
Sophie finished doing the dishes and went upstairs to her room. She had put the
red silk scarf on the top shelf of the closet with the Lego blocks. She took it down and
examined it carefully.
Hilde ...
Athens
... several tall buildings had risen from the ruins 
Early that evening Sophies mother went to visit a friend. As soon as she was
out of the house Sophie went down the garden to the den. There she found a thick
package beside the big cookie tin. Sophie tore it open. It was a video cassette.
She ran back to the house. A video tape! How on earth did the philosopher
know they had a VCR? And what was on the cassette?
Sophie put the cassette into the recorder. A sprawling city appeared on the TV
screen. As the camera zoomed in on the Acropolis Sophie realized that the city must
be Athens. She had often seen pictures of the ancient ruins there.
It was a live shot. Summer-clad tourists with cameras slung about them were
swarming among the ruins. One of them looked as if he was carrying a notice board.
There it was again. Didnt it say Hilde?
After a minute or two there was a close-up of a middle-aged man. He was rather
short, with a black, well-trimmed beard, and he was wearing a blue beret. He looked
into the camera and said: Welcome to Athens, Sophie. As you have probably
guessed, I am Alberto Knox. If not, I will just reiterate that the big rabbit is still being
pulled from the top hat of the universe.
We are standing at the Acropolis. The word means citadelor more
precisely, the city on the hill. People have lived up here since the Stone Age. The
reason, naturally, was its unique location. The elevated plateau was easy to defend
against marauders. From the Acropolis there was also an excellent view down to one
of the best harbors in the Mediterranean. As the early Athens began to develop on the
plain below the plateau, the Acropolis was used as a fortress and sacred shrine...
During the first half of the fifth century B.C., a bitter war was waged against the
Persians, and in 480 the Persian king Xerxes plundered Athens and burned all the old
wooden buildings of the Acropolis. A year later the Persians were defeated, and that
was the beginning of the Golden Age of Athens. The Acropolis was rebuilt prouder
and more magnificent than everand now purely as a sacred shrine.
This was the period when Socrates walked through the streets and squares
talking with the Athenians. He could thus have witnessed the rebirth of the Acropolis
and watched the construction of all the proud buildings we see around us. And what a
building site it was! Behind me you can see the biggest temple, the Parthenon, which
means the Virgins Place. It was built in honor of Athene, the patron goddess of
Athens. The huge marble structure does not have a single straight line; all four sides
are slightly curved to make the building appear less heavy. In spite of its colossal
dimensions, it gives the impression of lightness. In other words, it presents an optical
illusion. The columns lean slightly inwards, and would form a pyramid 1,500 meters
high if they were continued to a point above the temple. The temple contained nothing
but a twelve-meter-high statue of Athene. The white marble, which in those days was
painted in vivid colors, was transported here from a mountain sixteen kilometers
away.
Sophie sat with her heart in her mouth. Was this really the philosopher talking
to her? She had only seen his profile that one time in the darkness. Could he be the
same man who was now standing at the Acropolis in Athens?
He began to walk along the length of the temple and the camera followed him.
He walked right to the edge of the terrace and pointed out over the landscape. The
camera focused on an old theater which lay just below the plateau of the Acropolis.
There you can see the old Dionysos Theater, continued the man in the beret.
It is probably the very oldest theater in Europe. This is where the great tragedies of
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides were performed during the time of Socrates. I
referred earlier to the ill-fated King Oedipus. The tragedy about him, by Sophocles,
was first performed here. But they also played comedies. The best known writer of
comedies was Aristophanes, who also wrote a spiteful comedy about Socrates as the
buffoon of Athens. Right at the back you can see the stone wall which the actors used
as a backdrop. It was called skene, and is the origin of our word scene. Incidentally,
the word theater comes from an old Greek word meaning to see. But we must get
back to the philosophers, Sophie. We are going around the Parthenon and down
through the gateway ...
The little man walked around the huge temple and passed some smaller temples
on his right. Then he began to walk down some steps between several tall columns.
When he reached the foot of the Acropolis, he went up a small hill and pointed out
toward Athens: The hill we are standing on is called Areopagos. It was here that the
Athenian high court of justice passed judgment in murder trials. Many hundreds of
years later, St. Paul the Apostle stood here and preached about Jesus and Christianity
to the Athenians. We shall return to what he said on a later occasion. Down to the left
you can see the remains of the old city square in Athens, the agora. With the
exception of the large temple to Hephaestos, the god of smiths and metalworkers,
only some blocks of marble are preserved. Let us go down ...
The next moment he appeared among the ancient ruins. High up beneath the
skyat the top of Sophies screentowered the monumental Athene temple on the
Acropolis. Her philosophy teacher had seated himself on one of the blocks of marble.
He looked into the camera and said: We are sitting in the old agora in Athens. A
sorry sight, dont you think? Today, I mean. But once it was surrounded by splendid
temples, courts of justice and other public offices, shops, a concert hall, and even a
large gymnastics building. All situated around the square, which was a large open
space ... The whole of European civilization was founded in this modest area.
Words such as politics and democracy, economy and history, biology and
physics, mathematics and logic, theology and philosophy, ethics and psychology,
theory and method, idea and system date back to the tiny populace whose everyday
life centered around this square. This is where Socrates spent so much of his time
talking to the people he met. He might have buttonholed a slave bearing a jar of olive
oil, and asked the unfortunate man a question on philosophy, for Socrates held that a
slave had the same common sense as a man of rank. Perhaps he stood in an animated
wrangle with one of the citizensor held a subdued conversation with his young
pupil Plato. It is extraordinary to think about. We still speak of Socratic or Platonic
philosophy, but actually being Plato or Socrates is quite another matter.
Sophie certainly did think it was extraordinary to think about. But she thought it
was just as extraordinary the way her philosopher was suddenly talking to her on a
video that had been brought to her own secret hideout in the garden by a mysterious
dog.
The philosopher rose from the block of marble he was sitting on and said
quietly: It was actually my intention to leave it at that, Sophie. I wanted you to see
the Acropolis and the remains of the old agora in Athens. But I am not yet sure that
you have grasped just how splendid these surroundings once were ... so I am very
tempted to go a bit further. It is quite irregular of course ... but I am sure I can count
on it remaining just between the two of us. Oh well, a tiny glimpse will suffice anyway
...
He said no more, but remained standing there for a long time, staring into the
camera. While he stood there, several tall buildings had risen from the ruins. As if by
magic, all the old buildings were once again standing.
Above the skyline Sophie could still see the Acropolis, but now both that and all
the buildings down on the square were brand-new. They were covered with gold and
painted in garish colors. Gaily dressed people were strolling about the square. Some
wore swords, others carried jars on their heads, and one of them had a roll of papyrus
under his arm.
Then Sophie recognized her philosophy teacher. He was still wearing the blue
beret, but now he was dressed in a yellow tunic in the same style as everyone else. He
came toward Sophie, looked into the camera, and said:
Thats better! Now we are in the Athens of antiquity, Sophie. I wanted you to
come here in person, you see. We are in the year 402 B.C., only three years before
Socrates dies. I hope you appreciate this exclusive visit because it was very difficult
to hire a video camera ...
Sophie felt dizzy. How could this weird man suddenly be in Athens 2,400 years
ago? How could she be seeing a video film of a totally different age? There were no
videos in antiquity ... so could this be a movie?
But all the marble buildings looked real. If they had recreated all of the old
square in Athens as well as the Acropolis just for the sake of a filmthe sets would
have cost a fortune. At any rate it would be a colossal price to pay just to teach Sophie
about Athens.
The man in the beret looked up at her again.
Do you see those two men over there under the colonnade?
Sophie noticed an elderly man in a crumpled tunic. He had a long unkempt
beard, a snub nose, eyes like gimlets, and chubby cheeks. Beside him stood a handsome
young man.
That is Socrates and his young pupil, Plato. You are going to meet them
personally.
The philosopher went over to the two men, took off his beret, and said
something which Sophie did not understand. It must have been in Greek. Then he
looked into the camera and said, I told them you were a Norwegian girl who would
very much like to meet them. So now Plato will give you some questions to think
about. But we must do it quickly before the guards discover us.
Sophie felt the blood pounding in her temples as the young man stepped
forward and looked into the camera.
Welcome to Athens, Sophie, he said in a gentle voice. He spoke with an
accent. My name is Plato and I am going to give you four tasks. First you must think
over how a baker can bake fifty absolutely identical cookies. Then you can ask
yourself why all horses are the same. Next you must decide whether you think that
man has an immortal soul. And finally you must say whether men and women are
equally sensible. Good luck!
Then the picture on the TV screen disappeared. Sophie wound and rewound the
tape but she had seen all there was.
Sophie tried to think things through clearly. But as soon as she thought one
thought, another one crowded in before she had thought the first one to its end.
She had known from the start that her philosophy teacher was eccentric. But
when he started to use teaching methods that defied all the laws of nature, Sophie
thought he was going too far.
Had she really seen Socrates and Plato on TV? Of course not, that was
impossible. But it definitely wasnt a cartoon.
Sophie took the cassette out of the video recorder and ran up to her room with
it. She put it on the top shelf with all the Lego blocks. Then she sank onto the bed,
exhausted, and fell asleep.
Some hours later her mother came into the room. She shook Sophie gently and
said:
Whats the matter, Sophie?
Mmmm?
Youve gone to sleep with all your clothes on!
Sophie blinked her eyes sleepily.
Ive been to Athens, she mumbled. That was all she could manage to say as
she turned over and went back to sleep.
Plato
 a longing to return to the realm of the soul
Sophie woke with a start early the next morning. She glanced at the clock. It
was only a little after five but she was so wide awake that she sat up in bed. Why was
she wearing a dress? Then she remembered everything.
She climbed onto a stool and looked on the top shelf of the closet. Yesthere,
at the back, was the video cassette. It hadnt been a dream after all; at least, not all of
it.
But she couldnt really have seen Plato and Socrates ... oh, never mind! She
didnt have the energy to think about it any more. Perhaps her mother was right,
perhaps she was acting a bit nuts these days.
Anyway, she couldnt go back to sleep. Perhaps she ought to go down to the
den and see if the dog had left another letter. Sophie crept downstairs, put on a pair of
jogging shoes, and went out.
In the garden everything was wonderfully clear and still. The birds were
chirping so energetically that Sophie could hardly keep from laughing. The morning
dew twinkled in the grass like drops of crystal. Once again she was struck by the
incredible wonder of the world.
Inside the old hedge it was also very damp. Sophie saw no new letter from the
philosopher, but nevertheless she wiped off one of the thick roots and sat down.
She recalled that the video-Plato had given her some questions to answer. The
first was something about how a baker could bake fifty identical cookies.
Sophie had to think very carefully about that, because it definitely wouldnt be
easy. When her mother occasionally baked a batch of cookies, they were never all
exactly the same. But then she was not an expert pastry cook; sometimes the kitchen
looked as if a bomb had hit it. Even the cookies they bought at the bakers were never
exactly the same. Every single cookie was shaped separately in the bakers hands.
Then a satisfied smile spread over Sophies face. She remembered how once
she and her father went shopping while her mother was busy baking Christmas
cookies. When they got back there were a lot of gingerbread men spread out on the
kitchen table. Even though they werent all perfect, in a way they were all the same.
And why was that? Obviously because her mother had used the same mold for all of
them.
Sophie felt so pleased with herself for having remembered the incident that she
pronounced herself done with the first question. If a baker makes fifty absolutely
identical cookies, he must be using the same pastry mold for all of them. And thats
that!
Then the video-Plato had looked into the camera and asked why all horses were
the same. But they werent, at all! On the contrary, Sophie thought no two horses
were the same, just as no two people were the same.
She was ready to give up on that one when she remembered what she had
thought about the cookies. No one of them was exactly like any of the others. Some
were a bit thicker than the others, and some were broken. But still, everyone could see
that they werein a way exactly the same.
What Plato was really asking was perhaps why a horse was always a horse, and
not, for example, a cross between a horse and a pig. Because even though some horses
were as brown as bears and others were as white as lambs, all horses had something in
common. Sophie had yet to meet a horse with six or eight legs, for example.
But surely Plato couldnt believe that what made all horses alike was that they
were made with the same mold?
Then Plato had asked her a really difficult question. Does man have an immortal
soul? That was something Sophie felt quite unqualified to answer. All she knew was
that dead bodies were either cremated or buried, so there was no future for them. If
man had an immortal soul, one would have to believe that a person consisted of two
separate parts: a body that gets worn out after many yearsand a soul that operates
more or less independently of what happens to the body. Her grandmother had said
once that she felt it was only her body that was old. Inside she had always been the
same young girl-The thought of the young girl led Sophie to the last question: Are
women and men equally sensible? She was not so sure about that. It depended on
what Plato meant by sensible.
Something the philosopher had said about Socrates came into her mind.
Socrates had pointed out that everyone could understand philosophical truths if they
just used their common sense. He had also said that a slave had the same common
sense as a nobleman. Sophie was sure that he would also have said that women had
the same common sense as men.
While she sat thinking, there was a sudden rustling in the hedge, and the sound
of something puffing and blowing like a steam engine. The next second, the golden
Labrador slipped into the den. It had a large envelope in its mouth.
Hermes! cried Sophie. Drop it! Drop it! The dog dropped the envelope in
Sophies lap, and Sophie stretched out her hand to pat the dogs head. Good boy,
Hermes! she said. The dog lay down and allowed itself to be patted. But after a
couple of minutes it got up and began to push its way back through the hedge the
same way it had come in. Sophie followed with the brown envelope in her hand. She
crawled through the dense thicket and was soon outside the garden.
Hermes had already started to run toward the edge of the woods, and Sophie
followed a few yards behind. Twice the dog turned around and growled, but Sophie
was not to be deterred.
This time she was determined to find the philosophereven if it meant running
all the way to Athens.
The dog ran faster and suddenly turned off down a narrow path. Sophie chased
him, but after a few minutes he turned and faced her, barking like a watchdog. Sophie
still refused to give up, taking the opportunity to lessen the distance between them.
Hermes turned and raced down the path. Sophie realized that she would never
catch up with him. She stood quite still for what seemed like an eternity, listening to
him running farther and farther away. Then all was silent.
She sat down on a tree stump by a little clearing in the woods. She still had the
brown envelope in her hand. She opened it, drew out several typewritten pages, and
began to read:
PLATOS ACADEMY
Thank you for the pleasant time we spent together, Sophie. In Athens, I
mean. So now I have at least introduced myself. And since I have also
introduced Plato, we might as well begin without further ado.
Plato (428-347 B.C.) was twenty-nine years old when Socrates drank
the hemlock. He had been a pupil of Socrates for some time and had followed
his trial very closely. The fact that Athens could condemn its noblest citizen to
death did more than make a profound impression on him. It was to shape the
course of his entire philosophic endeavor.
To Plato, the death of Socrates was a striking example of the conflict
that can exist between society as it really is and the true or ideal society.
Platos first deed as a philosopher was to publish Socrates Apology, an
account of his plea to the large jury.
As you will no doubt recall, Socrates never wrote anything down,
although many of the pre-Socratics did. The problem is that hardly any of their
written material remains. But in the case of Plato, we believe that all his
principal works have been preserved. (In addition to Socrates Apology, Plato
wrote a collection of Epistles and about twenty-five philosophical Dialogues.)
That we have these works today is due not least to the fact that Plato set up
his own school of philosophy in a grove not far from Athens, named after the
legendary Greek hero Academus. The school was therefore known as the
Academy. (Since then, many thousands of academies have been
established all over the world. We still speak of academics and academic
subjects.)
The subjects taught at Platos Academy were philosophy, mathematics,
and gymnasticsalthough perhaps taught is hardly the right word. Lively
discourse was considered most important at Platos Academy. So it was not
purely by chance that Platos writings took the form of dialogues.
The Eternally True, Eternally Beautiful, and Eternally
Good
In the introduction to this course I mentioned that it could often be a
good idea to ask what a particular philosophers project was. So now I ask:
what were the problems Plato was concerned with?
Briefly, we can establish that Plato was concerned with the relationship
between what is eternal and immutable, on the one hand, and what flows,
on the other. (Just like the pre-Socratics, in fact.) Weve seen how the Sophists
and Socrates turned their attention from questions of natural philosophy to
problems related to man and society. And yet in one sense, even Socrates
and the Sophists were preoccupied with the relationship between the eternal
and immutable, and the flowing. They were interested in the problem as it
related to human morals and societys ideals or virtues. Very briefly, the
Sophists thought that perceptions of what was right or wrong varied from one
city-state to another, and from one generation to the next. So right and wrong
was something that flowed. This was totally unacceptable to Socrates. He
believed in the existence of eternal and absolute rules for what was right or
wrong. By using our common sense we can all arrive at these immutable
norms, since human reason is in fact eternal and immutable.
Do you follow, Sophie? Then along comes Plato. He is concerned with
both what is eternal and immutable in nature and what is eternal and
immutable as regards morals and society. To Plato, these two problems were
one and the same. He tried to grasp a reality that was eternal and
immutable.
And to be quite frank, that is precisely what we need philosophers for.
We do not need them to choose a beauty queen or the days bargain in
tomatoes. (This is why they are often unpopular!) Philosophers will try to
ignore highly topical affairs and instead try to draw peoples attention to what
is eternally true, eternally beautiful, and eternally good.
We can thus begin to glimpse at least the outline of Platos philosophical
project. But lets take one thing at a time. We are attempting to understand an
extraordinary mind, a mind that was to have a profound influence on all
subsequent European philosophy.
The World of Ideas
Both Empedocles and Democritus had drawn attention to the fact that
although in the natural world everything flows, there must nevertheless be
something that never changes (the four roots, or the atoms). Plato agreed
with the proposition as suchbut in quite a different way.
Plato believed that everything tangible in nature flows. So there are no
substances that do not dissolve. Absolutely everything that belongs to the
material world is made of a material that time can erode, but everything is
made after a timeless mold or form that is eternal and immutable.
You see? No, you dont.
Why are horses the same, Sophie? You probably dont think they are at
all. But there is something that all horses have in common, something that
enables us to identify them as horses. A particular horse flows, naturally. It
might be old and lame, and in time it will die. But the form of the horse is
eternal and immutable.
That which is eternal and immutable, to Plato, is therefore not a physical
basic substance, as it was for Empedocles and Democritus. Platos
conception was of eternal and immutable patterns, spiritual and abstract in
their nature that all things are fashioned after.
Let me put it like this: The pre-Socratics had given a reasonably good
explanation of natural change without having to presuppose that anything
actually changed. In the midst of natures cycle there were some eternal and
immutable smallest elements that did not dissolve, they thought. Fair enough,
Sophie! But they had no reasonable explanation for how these smallest
elements that were once building blocks in a horse could suddenly whirl together
four or five hundred years later and fashion themselves into a
completely new horse. Or an elephant or a crocodile, for that matter. Platos
point was that Democritus atoms never fashioned themselves into an eledile
or a crocophant. This was what set his philosophical reflections going.
If you already understand what I am getting at, you may skip this next
paragraph. But just in case, I will clarify: You have a box of Lego and you
build a Lego horse. You then take it apart and put the blocks back in the box.
You cannot expect to make a new horse just by shaking the box. How could
Lego blocks of their own accord find each other and become a new horse
again? No, you have to rebuild the horse, Sophie. And the reason you can do
it is that you have a picture in your mind of what the horse looked like. The
Lego horse is made from a model which remains unchanged from horse to
horse.
How did you do with the fifty identical cookies? Let us assume that you
have dropped in from outer space and have never seen a baker before. You
stumble into a tempting bakeryand there you catch sight of fifty identical
gingerbread men on a shelf. I imagine you would wonder how they could be
exactly alike. It might well be that one of them has an arm missing, another
has lost a bit of its head, and a third has a funny bump on its stomach. But
after careful thought, you would nevertheless conclude that all gingerbread
men have something in common. Although none of them is perfect, you would
suspect that they had a common origin. You would realize that all the cookies
were formed in the same mold. And what is more, Sophie, you are now seized
by the irresistible desire to see this mold. Because clearly, the mold itself must
be utter perfectionand in a sense, more beautifulin comparison with these
crude copies.
If you solved this problem all by yourself, you arrived at the philosophical
solution in exactly the same way that Plato did.
Like most philosophers, he dropped in from outer space. (He stood up
on the very tip of one of the fine hairs of the rabbits fur.) He was astonished
at the way all natural phenomena could be so alike, and he concluded that it
had to be because there are a limited number of forms behind everything we
see around us. Plato called these forms ideas. Behind every horse, pig, or human
being, there is the idea horse, idea pig, and idea human being. (In
the same way, the bakery we spoke of can have gingerbread men,
gingerbread horses, and gingerbread pigs. Because every self-respecting
bakery has more than one mold. But one mold is enough for each type of
gingerbread cookie.)
Plato came to the conclusion that there must be a reality behind the
material world. He called this reality the world of ideas; it contained the
eternal and immutable patterns behind the various phenomena we come
across in nature. This remarkable view is known as Platos theory of ideas.
True Knowledge
Im sure youve been following me, Sophie dear. But you may be
wondering whether Plato was being serious. Did he really believe that forms
like these actually existed in a completely different reality?
He probably didnt believe it literally in the same way for all his life, but in
some of his dialogues that is certainly how he means to be understood. Let us
try to follow his train of thought.
A philosopher, as we have seen, tries to grasp something that is eternal
and immutable. It would serve no purpose, for instance, to write a philosophic
treatise on the existence of a particular soap bubble. Partly because one
would hardly have time to study it in depth before it burst, and partly because
it would probably be rather difficult to find a market for a philosophic treatise
on something nobody has ever seen, and which only existed for five seconds.
Plato believed that everything we see around us in nature, everything
tangible, can be likened to a soap bubble, since nothing that exists in the
world of the senses is lasting. We know, of course, that sooner or later every
human being and every animal will die and decompose. Even a block of
marble changes and gradually disintegrates. (The Acropolis is falling into ruin,
Sophie! It is a scandal, but thats the way it is.) Platos point is that we can
never have true knowledge of anything that is in a constant state of change.
We can only have opinions about things that belong to the world of the
senses, tangible things. We can only have true knowledge of things that can
be understood with our reason.
All right, Sophie, Ill explain it more clearly: a gingerbread man can be so
lopsided after all that baking that it can be quite hard to see what it is meant to
be. But having seen dozens of gingerbread men that were more or less
successful, I can be pretty sure what the cookie mold was like. I can guess,
even though I have never seen it. It might not even be an advantage to see
the actual mold with my own eyes because we cannot always trust the
evidence of our senses. The faculty of vision can vary from person to person.
On the other hand, we can rely on what our reason tells us because that is the
same for everyone.
If you are sitting in a classroom with thirty other pupils, and the teacher
asks the class which color of the rainbow is the prettiest, he will probably get a
lot of different answers. But if he asks what 8 times 3 is, the whole class will
we hopegive the same answer. Because now reason is speaking and
reason is, in a way, the direct opposite of thinking so or feeling. We could
say that reason is eternal and universal precisely because it only expresses
eternal and universal states.
Plato found mathematics very absorbing because mathematical states
never change. They are therefore states we can have true knowledge of. But
here we need an example.
Imagine you find a round pinecone out in the woods. Perhaps you say
you think it looks completely round, whereas Joanna insists it is a bit
flattened on one side. (Then you start arguing about it!) But you cannot have
true knowledge of anything you can perceive with your eyes. On the other
hand you can say with absolute certainty that the sum of the angles in a circle
is 360 degrees. In this case you would be talking about an ideal circle which
might not exist in the physical world but which you can clearly visualize. (You
are dealing with the hidden gingerbread-man mold and not with the particular
cookie on the kitchen table.)
In short, we can only have inexact conceptions of things we perceive
with our senses. But we can have true knowledge of things we understand
with our reason. The sum of the angles in a triangle will remain 180 degrees
to the end of time. And similarly the idea horse will walk on four legs even if
all the horses in the sensory world break a leg.
An Immortal Soul
As I explained, Plato believed that reality is divided into two regions.
One region is the world of the senses, about which we can only have
approximate or incomplete knowledge by using our five (approximate or
incomplete) senses. In this sensory world, everything flows and nothing is
permanent. Nothing in the sensory world is, there are only things that come to
be and pass away.
The other region is the world of ideas, about which we can have true
knowledge by using our reason. This world of ideas cannot be perceived by
the senses, but the ideas (or forms) are eternal and immutable.
According to Plato, man is a dual creature. We have a body that flows,
is inseparably bound to the world of the senses, and is subject to the same
fate as everything else in this worlda soap bubble, for example. All our
senses are based in the body and are consequently unreliable. But we also
have an immortal souland this soul is the realm of reason. And not being
physical, the soul can survey the world of ideas.
But thats not all, Sophie. ITS NOT ALL!
Plato also believed that the soul existed before it inhabited the body, (it
was lying on a shelf in the closet with all the cookie molds.) But as soon as
the soul wakes up in a human body, it has forgotten all the perfect ideas.
Then something starts to happen. In fact, a wondrous process begins. As the
human being discovers the various forms in the natural world, a vague
recollection stirs his soul. He sees a horsebut an imperfect horse. (A gingerbread
horse!) The sight of it is sufficient to awaken in the soul a faint
recollection of the perfect horse, which the soul once saw in the world of
ideas, and this stirs the soul with a yearning to return to its true realm. Plato
calls this yearning eraswhich means love. The soul, then, experiences a
longing to return to its true origin. From now on, the body and the whole
sensory world is experienced as imperfect and insignificant. The soul yearns
to fly home on the wings of love to the world of ideas. It longs to be freed from
the chains of the body.
Let me quickly emphasize that Plato is describing an ideal course of life,
since by no means all humans set the soul free to begin its journey back to
the world of ideas. Most people cling to the sensory worlds reflections of
ideas. They see a horseand another horse. But they never see that of which
every horse is only a feeble imitation. (They rush into the kitchen and stuff
themselves with gingerbread cookies without so much as a thought as to
where they came from.) What Plato describes is the philosophersway. His
philosophy can be read as a description of philosophic practice.
When you see a shadow, Sophie, you will assume that there must be
something casting the shadow. You see the shadow of an animal. You think it
may be a horse, but you are not quite sure. So you turn around and see the
horse itselfwhich of course is infinitely more beautiful and sharper in outline
than the blurred horse-shadow. Plato believed similarly that all natural
phenomena are merely shadows of the eternal forms or ideas. But most
people are content with a life among shadows. They give no thought to what
is casting the shadows. They think shadows are all there are, never realizing
even that they are, in fact, shadows. And thus they pay no heed to the
immortality of their own soul.
Out of the Darkness of the Cave
Plato relates a myth which illustrates this. We call it the Myth of the
Cave. Ill retell it in my own words.
Imagine some people living in an underground cave. They sit with their
backs to the mouth of the cave with their hands and feet bound in such a way
that they can only look at the back wall of the cave. Behind them is a high
wall, and behind that wall pass human-like creatures, holding up various
figures above the top of the wall. Because there is a fire behind these figures,
they cast flickering shadows on the back wall of the cave. So the only thing
the cave dwellers can see is this shadow play. They have been sitting in this
position since they were born, so they think these shadows are all there are.
Imagine now that one of the cave dwellers manages to free himself from
his bonds. The first thing he asks himself is where all these shadows on the
cave wall come from. What do you think happens when he turns around and
sees the figures being held up above the wall? To begin with he is dazzled by
the sharp sunlight. He is also dazzled by the clarity of the figures because
until now he has only seen their shadow. If he manages to climb over the wall
and get past the fire into the world outside, he will be even more dazzled. But
after rubbing his eyes he will be struck by the beauty of everything. For the
first time he will see colors and clear shapes. He will see the real animals and
flowers that the cave shadows were only poor reflections of. But even now he
will ask himself where all the animals and flowers come from. Then he will see
the sun in the sky, and realize that this is what gives life to these flowers and
animals, just as the fire made the shadows visible.
The joyful cave dweller could now have gone skipping away into the
countryside, delighting in his new-found freedom. But instead he thinks of all
the others who are still down in the cave. He goes back. Once there, he tries
to convince the cave dwellers that the shadows on the cave wall are but
flickering reflections of real things. But they dont believe him. They point to
the cave wall and say that what they see is all there is. Finally they kill him.
What Plato was illustrating in the Myth of the Cave is the philosophers
road from shadowy images to the true ideas behind all natural phenomena.
He was probably also thinking of Socrates, whom the cave dwellers killed
because he disturbed their conventional ideas and tried to light the way to true
insight. The Myth of the Cave illustrates Socrates courage and his sense of
pedagogic responsibility.
Platos point was that the relationship between the darkness of the cave
and the world beyond corresponds to the relationship between the forms of
the natural world and the world of ideas. Not that he meant that the natural
world is dark and dreary, but that it is dark and dreary in comparison with the
clarity of ideas. A picture of a beautiful landscape is not dark and dreary
either. But it is only a picture.
The Philosophic State
The Myth of the Cave is found in Platos dialogue the Republic. In this
dialogue Plato also presents a picture of the ideal state, that is to say an
imaginary, ideal, or what we would call a Utopian, state. Briefly, we could say
that Plato believed the state should be governed by philosophers. He bases
his explanation of this on the construction of the human body.
According to Plato, the human body is composed of three parts: the
head, the chest, and the abdomen. For each of these three parts there is a
corresponding faculty of the soul. Reason belongs to the head, will belongs to
the chest, and appetite belongs to the abdomen. Each of these soul faculties
also has an ideal, or virtue. Reason aspires to wisdom, Will aspires to
courage, and Appetite must be curbed so that temperance can be exercised.
Only when the three parts of the body function together as a unity do we get a
harmonious or virtuous individual. At school, a child must first learn to curb
its appetites, then it must develop courage, and finally reason leads to
wisdom.
Plato now imagines a state built up exactly like the tripartite human
body. Where the body has head, chest, and abdomen, the State has rulers,
auxiliaries, and fa-borers (farmers, for example). Here Plato clearly uses
Greek medical science as his model. Just as a healthy and harmonious man
exercises balance and temperance, so a virtuous state is characterized by
everyone knowing their place in the overall picture.
Like every aspect of Platos philosophy, his political philosophy is
characterized by rationalism. The creation of a good state depends on its
being governed with reason. Just as the head governs the body, so
philosophers must rule society.
Let us attempt a simple illustration of the relationship between the three
parts of man and the state:
BODY SOUL VIRTUE STATE
head reason wisdom rulers
chest will courage auxiliaries
abdomen appetite temperance laborers
Platos ideal state is not unlike the old Hindu caste system, in .which
each and every person has his or her particular function for the good of the
whole. Even before Platos time the Hindu caste system had the same
tripartite division between the auxiliary caste (or priest caste), the warrior
caste, and the laborer caste. Nowadays we would perhaps call Platos state
totalitarian. But it is worth noting that he believed women could govern just as
effectively as men for the simple reason that the rulers govern by virtue of
their reason. Women, he asserted, have exactly the same powers of
reasoning as men, provided they get the same training and are exempt from
child rearing and housekeeping. In Platos ideal state, rulers and warriors are
not allowed family life or private property. The rearing of children is
considered too important to be left to the individual and should be the
responsibility of the state. (Plato was the first philosopher to advocate stateorganized
nursery schools and full-time education.)
After a number of significant political setbacks, Plato wrote the tows, in
which he described the constitutional state as the next-best state. He now
reintroduced both private property and family ties. Womens freedom thus
became more restricted. However, he did say that a state that does not
educate and train women is like a man who only trains his right arm.
All in all, we can say that Plato had a positive view of women
considering the time he lived in. In the dialogue Symposium, he gives a
woman, the legendary priestess Diotima, the honor of having given Socrates
his philosophic insight.
So that was Plato, Sophie. His astonishing theories have been
discussedand criticizedfor more than two thousand years. The first man
to do so was one of the pupils from his own Academy. His name was
Aristotle, and he was the third great philosopher from Athens.
Ill say no more!
While Sophie had been reading about Plato, the sun had risen over the woods to
the east. It was peeping over the horizon just as she was reading how one man
clambered out of the cave and blinked in the dazzling light outside.
It was almost as if she had herself emerged from an underground cave. Sophie
felt that she saw nature in a completely different way after reading about Plato. It was
rather like having been color-blind. She had seen some shadows but had not seen the
clear ideas.
She was not sure Plato was right in everything he had said about the eternal
patterns, but it was a beautiful thought that all living things were imperfect copies of
the eternal forms in the world of ideas. Because wasnt it true that all flowers, trees,
human beings, and animals were imperfect?
Everything she saw around her was so beautiful and so alive that Sophie had to
rub her eyes to really believe it. But nothing she was looking at now would last. And
yetin a hundred years the same flowers and the same animals would be here again.
Even if every single flower and every single animal should fade away and be forgotten,
there would be something that recollected how it all looked.
Sophie gazed out at the world. Suddenly a squirrel ran up the trunk of a pine
tree. It circled the trunk a few times and disappeared into the branches.
Ive seen you before! thought Sophie. She realized that maybe it was not the
same squirrel that she had seen previously, but she had seen the same form. For all
she knew, Plato could have been right. Maybe she really had seen the eternal
squirrel beforein the world of ideas, before her soul had taken residence in a
human body.
Could it be true that she had lived before? Had her soul existed before it got a
body to move around in? And was it really true that she carried a little golden nugget
inside hera jewel that cannot be corroded by time, a soul that would live on when
her own body grew old and died?
The Majors Cabin
... the girl in the mirror winked with both eyes
It was only a quarter past seven. There was no need to hurry home. Sophies
mother always took it easy on Sundays, so she would probably sleep for another two
hours.
Should she go a bit farther into the woods and try to find Alberto Knox? And
why had the dog snarled at her so viciously?
Sophie got up and began to walk down the path Hermes had taken. She had the
brown envelope with the pages on Plato in her hand. Wherever the path diverged she
took the wider one.
Birds were chirping everywherein the trees and in the air, in bush and thicket.
They were busily occupied with their morning pursuits. They knew no difference
between weekdays and Sundays. Who had taught them to do all that? Was there a tiny
computer inside each one of them, programming them to do certain things?
The path led up over a little hill, then steeply down between tall pine trees. The
woods were so dense now that she could only see a few yards between the trees.
Suddenly she caught sight of something glittering between the pine trunks. It
must be a little lake. The path went the other way but Sophie picked her way among
the trees. Without really knowing why, she let her feet lead her.
The lake was no bigger than a soccer field. Over on the other side she could see
a red-painted cabin in a small clearing surrounded by silver birches. A faint wisp of
smoke was rising from the chimney.
Sophie went down to the waters edge. It was very muddy in many places, but
then she noticed a rowboat. It was drawn halfway out of the water. There was a pair
of oars in it.
Sophie looked around. Whatever she did, it would be impossible to get around
the lake to the red cabin without getting her shoes soaked. She went resolutely over to
the boat and pushed it into the water. Then she climbed aboard, set the oars in the
rowlocks, and rowed across the lake. The boat soon touched the opposite bank.
Sophie went ashore and tried to pull the boat up after her. The bank was much steeper
here than the opposite bank had been.
She glanced over her shoulder only once before walking up toward the cabin.
She was quite startled at her own boldness. How did she dare do this? She had
no idea. It was as if something impelled her.
Sophie went up to the door and knocked. She waited a while but nobody
answered. She tried the handle cautiously, and the door opened.
Hallo! she called. Is anyone at home?
She went in and found herself in a living room. She dared not shut the door
behind her.
Somebody was obviously living here. Sophie could hear wood crackling in the
old stove. Someone had been here very recently.
On a big dining table stood a typewriter, some books, a couple of pencils, and a
pile of paper. A smaller table and two chairs stood by the window that overlooked the
lake. Apart from that there was very little furniture, although the whole of one wall
was lined with bookshelves filled with books. Above a white chest of drawers hung a
large round mirror in a heavy brass frame. It looked very old.
On one of the walls hung two pictures. One was an oil painting of a white house
which lay a stones throw from a little bay with a red boathouse. Between the house
and the boathouse was a sloping garden with an apple tree, a few thick bushes, and
some rocks. A dense fringe of birch trees framed the garden like a garland. The title of
the painting was Bjerkely.
Beside that painting hung an old portrait of a man sitting in a chair by a
window. He had a book in his lap. This picture also had a little bay with trees and
rocks in the background. It looked as though it had been painted several hundred
years ago. The title of the picture was Berkeley. The painters name was Smibert.
Berkeley and Bjerkely. How strange!
Sophie continued her investigation. A door led from the living room to a small
kitchen. Someone had just done the dishes. Plates and glasses were piled on a tea
towel, some of them still glistening with drops of soapy water. There was a tin bowl
on the floor with some leftover scraps of food in it. Whoever lived here had a pet, a
dog or a cat.
Sophie went back to the living room. Another door led to a tiny bedroom. On
the floor next to the bed there were a couple of blankets in a thick bundle. Sophie discovered
some golden hairs on the blankets. Here was the evidence! Now Sophie knew
that the occupants of the cabin were Alberto Knox and Hermes.
Back in the living room, Sophie stood in front of the mirror. The glass was
matte and scratched, and her reflection correspondingly blurred. Sophie began to
make faces at herself like she did at home in the bathroom. Her reflection did exactly
the same, which was only to be expected.
But all of a sudden something scary happened. Just oncein the space of a split
secondSophie saw quite clearly that the girl in the mirror winked with both eyes.
Sophie started back in fright. If she herself had winkedhow could she have seen the
other girl wink? And not only that, it seemed as though the other girl had winked at
Sophie as if to say: I can see you, Sophie. I am in here, on the other side.
Sophie felt her heart beating, and at the same time she heard a dog barking in
the distance. Hermes! She had to get out of here at once. Then she noticed a green
wallet on the chest of drawers under the mirror. It contained a hundred-crown note, a
fifty, and a school I.D. card. It showed a picture of a girl with fair hair. Under the
picture was the girls name: Hilde Moller Knag ...
Sophie shivered. Again she heard the dog bark. She had to get out, at once!
As she hurried past the table she noticed a white envelope between all the books
and the pile of paper. It had one word written on it: SOPHIE.
Before she had time to realize what she was doing, she grabbed the envelope
and stuffed it into the brown envelope with the Plato pages. Then she rushed out of
the door and slammed it behind her.
The barking was getting closer. But worst of all was that the boat was gone.
After a second or two she saw it, adrift halfway across the lake. One of the oars was
floating beside it. All because she hadnt been able to pull it completely up on land.
She heard the dog barking quite nearby now and saw movements between the trees on
the other side of the lake.
Sophie didnt hesitate any longer. With the big envelope in her hand, she
plunged into the bushes behind the cabin. Soon she was having to wade through
marshy ground, sinking in several times to well above her ankles. But she had to keep
going. She had to get home.
Presently she stumbled onto a path. Was it the path she had taken earlier? She
stopped to wring out her dress. And then she began to cry.
How could she have been so stupid? The worst of all was the boat. She couldnt
forget the sight of the row-boat with the one oar drifting helplessly on the lake. It was
all so embarrassing, so shameful. . .
The philosophy teacher had probably reached the lake by now. He would need
the boat to get home. Sophie felt almost like a criminal. But she hadnt done it on
purpose.
The envelope! That was probably even worse. Why had she taken it? Because
her name was on it, of course, so in a way it was hers. But even so, she felt like a
thief. And whats more, she had provided the evidence that it was she who had been
there.
Sophie drew the note out of the envelope. It said:
What came firstthe chicken or the idea chicken ?
Are we born with innate ideas? What is the difference between a plant, an
animal, and a human?
Why does it rain?
What does it take to live a good life?
Sophie couldnt possibly think about these questions right now, but she
assumed they had something to do with the next philosopher. Wasnt he called
Aristotle?
When she finally saw the hedge after running so far through the woods it was
like swimming ashore after a shipwreck. The hedge looked funny from the other side.
She didnt look at her watch until she had crawled into the den. It was ten-thirty.
She put the big envelope into the biscuit tin with the other papers and stuffed the note
with the new questions down her tights.
Her mother was on the telephone when she came in. When she saw Sophie she
hung up quickly.
Where on earth have you been?
I... went for a walk ... in the woods, she stammered.
So I see.
Sophie stood silently, watching the water dripping from her dress.
I called Joanna...
Joanna?
Her mother brought her some dry clothes. Sophie only just managed to hide the
philosophers note. Then they sat together in the kitchen, and her mother made some
hot chocolate.
Were you with him? she asked after a while.
Him?
Sophie could only think about her philosophy teacher.
With him, yes. Him.... your rabbit!
Sophie shook her head.
What do you do when youre together, Sophie? Why are you so wet?
Sophie sat staring gravely at the table. But deep down inside she was laughing.
Poor Mom, now she had that to worry about.
She shook her head again. Then more questions came raining down on her.
Now I want the truth. Were you out all night? Why did you go to bed with
your clothes on? Did you sneak out as soon as I had gone to bed? Youre only
fourteen, Sophie. I demand to know who you are seeing!
Sophie started to cry. Then she talked. She was still frightened, and when you
are frightened you usually talk.
She explained that she had woken up very early and had gone for a walk in the
woods. She told her mother about the cabin and the boat, and about the mysterious
mirror. But she mentioned nothing about the secret correspondence course. Neither
did she mention the green wallet. She didnt quite know why, but she had to keep
Hilde for herself.
Her mother put her arms around Sophie, and Sophie knew that her mother
believed her now.
I dont have a boyfriend, Sophie sniffed. It was just something I said because
you were so upset about the white rabbit.
And you really went all the way to the majors cabin ... said her mother
thoughtfully.
The majors cabin? Sophie stared at her mother.
The little woodland cabin is called the majors cabin because some years ago
an army major lived there for a time. He was rather eccentric, a little crazy, I think.
But never mind that. Since then the cabin has been unoccupied.
But it isnt! Theres a philosopher living there now.
Oh stop, dont start fantasizing again!
Sophie stayed in her room, thinking about what had happened. Her head felt
like a roaring circus full of lumbering elephants, silly clowns, daring trapeze flyers,
and trained monkeys. But one image recurred unceasingly a small rowboat with
one oar drifting in a lake deep in the woodsand someone needing the boat to get
home.
She felt sure that the philosophy teacher didnt wish her any harm, and would
certainly forgive her if he knew she had been to his cabin. But she had broken an
agreement. That was all the thanks he got for taking on her philosophic education.
How could she make up for it? Sophie took out her pink notepaper and began to write:
Dear Philosopher, It was me who was in your cabin early Sunday morning. I
wanted so much to meet you and discuss some of the philosophic problems. For the
moment I am a Plato fan, but I am not so sure he was right about ideas or pattern
pictures existing in another reality. Of course they exist in our souls, but I thinkfor
the moment anyway that this is a different thing. I have to admit too that I am not
altogether convinced of the immortality of the soul. Personally, I have no
recollections from my former lives. If you could convince me that my deceased
grandmothers soul is happy in the world of ideas, I would be most grateful.
Actually, it was not for philosophic reasons that I started to write this letter
(which I shall put in a pink envelope with a lump of sugar). I just wanted to say I was
sorry for being disobedient. I tried to pull the boat completely up on shore but I was
obviously not strong enough. Or perhaps a big wave dragged the boat out again.
I hope you managed to get home without getting your feet wet. If not, it might
comfort you to know that I got soaked and will probably have a terrible cold. But
thatll be my own fault.
I didnt touch anything in the cabin, but I am sorry to say that I couldnt resist
the temptation to take the envelope that was on the table. It wasnt because I wanted
to steal anything, but as my name was on it, I thought in my confusion that it belonged
to me. I am really and truly sorry, and I promise never to disappoint you again.
P.S. I will think all the new questions through very carefully, starting now.
P.P.S. Is the mirror with the brass frame above the white chest of drawers an
ordinary mirror or a magic mirror? Im only asking because I am not used to seeing
my own reflection wink with both eyes.
With regards from your sincerely interested pupil, SOPHIE
Sophie read the letter through twice before she put it in the envelope. She
thought it was less formal than the previous letter she had written. Before she went
downstairs to the kitchen to get a lump of sugar she looked at the note with the days
questions:
What came firstthe chicken or the idea chicken?
This question was just as tricky as the old riddle of the chicken and the egg.
There would be no chicken without the egg, and no egg without the chicken. Was it
really just as complicated to figure out whether the chicken or the idea chicken
came first? Sophie understood what Plato meant. He meant that the idea chicken
had existed in the world of ideas long before chickens existed in the sensory world.
According to Plato, the soul had seen the idea chicken before it took up residence
in a body. But wasnt this just where Sophie thought Plato must be mistaken? How
could a person who had never seen a live chicken or a picture of a chicken ever have
any idea of a chicken? Which brought her to the next question:
Are we born with innate ideas? Most unlikely, thought Sophie. She could
hardly imagine a newborn baby being especially well equipped with ideas. One could
obviously never be sure, because the fact that the baby had no language did not
necessarily mean that it had no ideas in its head. But surely we have to see things in
the world before we can know anything about them.
What is the difference between a plant, an animal, and a human? Sophie
could immediately see very clear differences.
For instance, she did not think a plant had a very complicated emotional life.
Who had ever heard of a bluebell with a broken heart? A plant grows, takes
nourishment, and produces seeds so that it can reproduce itself. Thats about all one
could say about plants. Sophie concluded that everything that applied to plants also
applied to animals and humans. But animals had other attributes as well. They could
move, for example. (When did a rose ever run a marathon?) It was a bit harder to
point to any differences between animals and humans. Humans could think, but
couldnt animals do so as well? Sophie was convinced that her cat Sherekan could
think. At least, it could be very calculating. But could it reflect on philosophical
questions? Could a cat speculate about the difference between a plant, an animal, and
a human? Hardly! A cat could probably be either contented or unhappy, but did it ever
ask itself if there was a God or whether it had an immortal soul? Sophie thought that
was extremely doubtful. But the same problem was raised here as with the baby and
the innate ideas. It was just as difficult to talk to a cat about such questions as it would
be to discuss them with a baby.
Why does it rain? Sophie shrugged her shoulders. It probably rains because
seawater evaporates and the clouds condense into raindrops. Hadnt she learnt that in
the third grade? Of course, one could always say that it rains so that plants and
animals can grow. But was that true? Had a shower any actual purpose?
The last question definitely had something to do with purpose: What does it
take to live a good life?
The philosopher had written something about this quite early on in the course.
Everybody needs food, warmth, love, and care. Such basics were the primary
condition for a good life, at any rate. Then he had pointed out that people also needed
to find answers to certain philosophical questions. It was probably also quite
important to have a job you liked. If you hated traffic, for instance, you would not be
very happy as a taxi driver. And if you hated doing homework it would probably be a
bad idea to become a teacher. Sophie loved animals and wanted to be a vet. But in any
case she didnt think it was necessary to win a million in the lottery to live a good life.
Quite the opposite, more likely. There was a saying:
The devil finds work for idle hands.
Sophie stayed in her room until her mother called her down to a big midday
meal. She had prepared sirloin steak and baked potatoes. There were cloudberries and
cream for dessert.
They talked about all kinds of things. Sophies mother asked her how she
wanted to celebrate her fifteenth birthday. It was only a few weeks away.
Sophie shrugged.
Arent you going to invite anyone? I mean, dont you want to have a party?
Maybe.
We could ask Martha and Anne Marie ... and Helen. And Joanna, of course.
And Jeremy, perhaps. But thats for you to decide. I remember my own fifteenth
birthday so clearly, you know. It doesnt seem all that long ago. I felt I was already
quite grown up. Isnt it odd, Sophie! I dont feel I have changed at all since then.
You havent. Nothing changes. You have just developed, gotten older...
Mm ... that was a very grownup thing to say. I just think its all happened so
very quickly.
Aristotle
...a meticulous organizer who wanted to clarify our concepts 
While her mother was taking her afternoon nap, Sophie went down to the den.
She had put a lump of sugar in the pink envelope and written To Alberto on the outside.
There was no new letter, but after a few minutes Sophie heard the dog
approaching.
Hermes! she called, and the next moment he had pushed his way into the den
with a big brown envelope in his mouth.
Good boy! Sophie put her arm around the dog, which was snorting and
snuffling like a walrus. She took the pink envelope with the lump of sugar and put it
in the dogs mouth. He crawled through the hedge and made off into the woods again.
Sophie opened the big envelope apprehensively, wondering whether it would
contain anything about the cabin and the boat.
It contained the usual typed pages held together with a paperclip. But there was
also a loose page inside. On it was written:
Dear Miss Sleuth, or, to be more exact, Miss Burglar. The case has already been
handed over to the police.
Not really. No, Im not angry. If you are just as curious when it comes to
discovering answers to the riddles of philosophy, Id say your adventure was very
promising. Its just a little annoying that Ill have to move now. Still, I have no one to
blame but myself, I suppose. I might have known you were a person who would
always want to get to the bottom of things.
Greetings, Alberto
Sophie was relieved. So he was not angry after all. But why would he have to
move?
She took the papers and ran up to her room. It would be prudent to be in the
house when her mother woke up. Lying comfortably on her bed, she began to read
about Aristotle.
PHILOSOPHER AND SCIENTIST
Dear Sophie: You were probably astonished by Platos theory or ideas.
You are not the only one! I do not know whether you swallowed the whole
thinghook, line, and sinkeror whether you had any critical comments. But
if you did have, you can be sure that the self-same criticism was raised by
Aristotle (384-322 B.C.), who was a pupil at Platos Academy for almost
twenty years.
Aristotle was not a native of Athens. He was born in Macedonia and
came to Platos Academy when Plato was 61. Aristotles father was a
respected physician and therefore a scientist. This background already tells
us something about Aristotles philosophic project. What he was most
interested in was nature study. He was not only the last of the great Greek
philosophers, he was Europes first great biologist.
Taking it to extremes, we could say that Plato was so engrossed in his
eternal forms, or ideas, that he took very little notice of the changes in
nature. Aristotle, on the other hand, was preoccupied with just these
changesor with what we nowadays describe as natural processes.
To exaggerate even more, we could say that Plato turned his back on
the sensory world and shut his eyes to everything we see around us. (He
wanted to escape from the cave and look out over the eternal world of ideas!)
Aristotle did the opposite: he got down on all fours and studied frogs and fish,
anemones and poppies.
While Plato used his reason, Aristotle used his senses as well.
We find decisive differences between the two, not least in their writing.
Plato was a poet and mythologist; Aristotles writings were as dry and precise
as an encyclopedia. On the other hand, much of what he wrote was based on
up-to-the-minute field studies.
Records from antiquity refer to 170 titles supposedly written by Aristotle.
Of these, 47 are preserved. These are not complete books; they consist
largely of lecture notes. In his time, philosophy was still mainly an oral activity.
The significance of Aristotle in European culture is due not least to the
fact that he created the terminology that scientists use today. He was the
great organizer who founded and classified the various sciences.
Since Aristotle wrote on all the sciences, I will limit myself to some of the
most important areas. Now that I have told you such a lot about Plato, you
must start by hearing how Aristotle refuted Platos theory of ideas. Later we
will look at the way he formulated his own natural philosophy, since it was
Aristotle who summed up what the natural philosophers before him had said.
Well see how he categorizes our concepts and founds the discipline of Logic
as a science. And finally Ill tell you a little about Aristotles view of man and
society.
No Innate Ideas
Like the philosophers before him, Plato wanted to find the eternal and
immutable in the midst of all change. So he found the perfect ideas that were
superior to the sensory world. Plato furthermore held that ideas were more
real than all the phenomena of nature. First came the idea horse, then came
all the sensory worlds horses trotting along like shadows on a cave wall. The
idea chicken came before both the chicken and the egg.
Aristotle thought Plato had turned the whole thing upside down. He
agreed with his teacher that the particular horse flows and that no horse
lives forever. He also agreed that the actual form of the horse is eternal and
immutable. But the idea horse was simply a concept that we humans had
formed after seeing a certain number of horses. The idea or form horse
thus had no existence of its own. To Aristotle, the idea or the form horse
was made up of the horses characteristicswhich define what we today call
the horse species.
To be more precise: by form horse, Aristotle meant that which is
common to all horses. And here the metaphor of the gingerbread mold does
not hold up because the mold exists independently of the particular gingerbread
cookies. Aristotle did not believe in the existence of any such molds or
forms that, as it were, lay on their own shelf beyond the natural world. On the
contrary, to Aristotle the forms were in the things, because they were the
particular characteristics of these things.
So Aristotle disagreed with Plato that the idea chicken came before the
chicken. What Aristotle called the form chicken is present in every single
chicken as the chickens particular set characteristicsfor one, that it lays
eggs. The real chicken and the form chicken are thus just as inseparable as
body and soul.
And that is really the essence of Aristotles criticism of Platos theory of
ideas. But you should not ignore the fact that this was a dramatic turn of
thought. The highest degree of reality, in Platos theory, was that which we
think with our reason. It was equally apparent to Aristotle that the highest
degree of reality is that which we perceive with our senses. Plato thought that
all the things we see in the natural world were purely reflections of things that
existed in the higher reality of the world of ideasand thereby in the human
soul. Aristotle thought the opposite: things that are in the human soul were
purely reflections of natural objects. So nature is the real world. According to
Aristotle, Plato was trapped in a mythical world picture in which the human
imagination was confused with the real world.
Aristotle pointed out that nothing exists in consciousness that has not
first been experienced by the senses. Plato would have said that there is
nothing in the natural world that has not first existed in the world of ideas.
Aristotle held that Plato was thus doubling the number of things. He
explained a horse by referring to the idea horse. But what kind of an
explanation is that, Sophie? Where does the idea horse come from, is my
question. Might there not even be a third horse, which the idea horse is just
an imitation of?
Aristotle held that all our thoughts and ideas have come into our
consciousness through what we have heard and seen. But we also have an
innate power of reason. We have no innate ideas, as Plato held, but we have
the innate faculty of organizing all sensory impressions into categories and
classes. This is how concepts such as stone, plant, animal, and human
arise. Similarly there arise concepts like horse, lobster, and canary.
Aristotle did not deny that humans have innate reason. On the contrary,
it is precisely reason, according to Aristotle, that is mans most distinguishing
characteristic. But our reason is completely empty until we have sensed
something. So man has no innate ideas.
The Form of a Thing Is Its Specific Characteristics
Having come to terms with Platos theory of ideas, Aristotle decided that
reality consisted of various separate things that constitute a unity of form and
substance. The substance is what things are made of, while the form is
each things specific characteristics.
A chicken is fluttering about in front of you, Sophie. The chickens form
is precisely that it fluttersand that it cackles and lays eggs. So by the form
of a chicken, we mean the specific characteristics of its speciesor in other
words, what it does. When the chicken diesand cackles no moreits form
ceases to exist. The only thing that remains is the chickens substance
(sadly enough, Sophie), but then it is no longer a chicken.
As I said earlier, Aristotle was concerned with the changes in nature.
Substance always contains the potentiality to realize a specific form. We
could say that substance always strives toward achieving an innate
potentiality. Every change in nature, according to Aristotle, is a transformation
of substance from the potential to the actual.
Yes, Ill explain what I mean, Sophie. See if this funny story helps you. A
sculptor is working on a large block of granite. He hacks away at the formless
block every day. One day a little boy comes by and says, What are you
looking for?
Wait and see, answers the sculptor. After a few days the little boy
comes back, and now the sculptor has carved a beautiful horse out of the
granite. The boy stares at it in amazement, then he turns to the sculptor and
says, How did you know it was in there?
How indeed! In a sense, the sculptor had seen the horses form in the
block of granite, because that particular block of granite had the potentiality to
be formed into the shape or a horse. Similarly Aristotle believed that
everything in nature has the potentiality of realizing, or achieving, a specific
form.
Let us return to the chicken and the egg. A chickens egg has the
potentiality to become a chicken. This does not mean that all chickens eggs
become chickensmany of them end up on the breakfast table as fried eggs,
omelettes, or scrambled eggs, without ever having realized their potentiality.
But it is equally obvious that a chickens egg cannot become a goose. That
potentiality is not within a chickens egg. The form of a thing, then, says
something about its limitation as well as its potentiality.
When Aristotle talks about the substance and form of things, he does
not only refer to living organisms. Just as it is the chickens form to cackle,
flutter its wings, and lay eggs, it is the form of the stone to fall to the ground.
Just as the chicken cannot help cackling, the stone cannot help falling to the
ground. You can, of course, lift a stone and hurl it high into the air, but
because it is the stones nature to fall to the ground, you cannot hurl it to the
moon. (Take care when you perform this experiment, because the stone
might take revenge and find the shortest route back to the earth!)
The Final Cause
Before we leave the subject of all living and dead things having a form
that says something about their potential action, I must add that Aristotle had
a remarkable view of causality in nature.
Today when we talk about the cause of anything, we mean how it
came to happen. The windowpane was smashed because Peter hurled a
stone through it; a shoe is made because the shoemaker sews pieces of
leather together. But Aristotle held that there were different types of cause in
nature. Altogether he named four different causes. It is important to
understand what he meant by what he called the final cause.
In the case of window smashing, it is quite reasonable to ask why Peter
threw the stone. We are thus asking what his purpose was. There can be no
doubt that purpose played a role, also, in the matter of the shoe being made.
But Aristotle also took into account a similar purpose when considering the
purely lifeless processes in nature. Heres an example:
Why does it rain, Sophie? You have probably learned at school that it
rains because the moisture in the clouds cools and condenses into raindrops
that are drawn to the earth by the force of gravity. Aristotle would have
nodded in agreement. But he would have added that so far you have only
mentioned three of the causes. The material cause is that the moisture (the
clouds) was there at the precise moment when the air cooled. The efficient
cause is that the moisture cools, and the formal cause is that the form, or
nature of the water, is to fall to the earth. But if you stopped there, Aristotle
would add that it rains because plants and animals need rainwater in order to
grow. This he called the final cause. Aristotle assigns the raindrops a lifetask,
or purpose.
We would probably turn the whole thing upside down and say that plants
grow because they find moisture. You can see the difference, cant you,
Sophie? Aristotle believed that there is a purpose behind everything in nature.
It rains so that plants can grow; oranges and grapes grow so that people can
eat them.
That is not the nature of scientific reasoning today. We say that food and
water are necessary conditions of life for man and beast. Had we not had
these conditions we would not have existed. But it is not the purpose of water
or oranges to be food for us.
In the question of causality then, we are tempted to say that Aristotle
was wrong. But let us not be too hasty. Many people believe that God created
the world as it is so that all His creatures could live in it. Viewed in this way, it
can naturally be claimed that there is water in the rivers because animals and
humans need water to live. But now we are talking about Gods purpose. The
raindrops and the waters of the river have no interest in our welfare.
Logic
The distinction between form and substance plays an important part
in Aristotles explanation of the way we discern things in the world.
When we discern things, we classify them in various groups or
categories. I see a horse, then I see another horse, and another. The horses
are not exactly alike, but they have something in common, and this common
something is the horses form. Whatever might be distinctive, or individual,
belongs to the horses substance.
So we go around pigeonholing everything. We put cows in cowsheds,
horses in stables, pigs in pigsties, and chickens in chicken coops. The same
happens when Sophie Amundsen tidies up her room. She puts her books on
the bookshelf, her schoolbooks in her schoolbag, and her magazines in the
drawer. Then she folds her clothes neatly and puts them in the closet
underwear on one shelf, sweaters on another, and socks in a drawer on their
own. Notice that we do the same thing in our minds. We distinguish between
things made of stone, things made of wool, and things made of rubber. We
distinguish between things that are alive or dead, and we distinguish between
vegetable, animal, and human.
Do you see, Sophie? Aristotle wanted to do a thorough clearing up in
natures room. He tried to show that everything in nature belongs to different
categories and subcategories. (Hermes is a live creature, more specifically an
animal, more specifically a vertebrate, more specifically a mammal, more
specifically a dog, more specifically a Labrador, more specifically a male
Labrador.)
Go into your room, Sophie. Pick up something, anything, from the floor.
Whatever you take, you will find that what you are holding belongs to a higher
category The day you see something you are unable to classify you will get a
shock. If, for example, you discover a small whatsit, and you cant really say
whether it is animal, vegetable, or mineralI dont think you would dare touch
it.
Saying animal, vegetable, and mineral reminds me of that party game
where the victim is sent outside the room, and when he comes in again he
has to guess what everyone else is thinking of. Everyone has agreed to think
of Fluffy, the cat, which at the moment is in the neighbors garden. The victim
comes in and begins to guess. The others must only answer yes or no. If
the victim is a good Aristotelianand therefore no victimthe game could go
pretty much as follows:
Is it concrete? (Yes!) Mineral? (No!) Is it alive? (Yes!) Vegetable? (No!)
Animal? (Yes!) Is it a bird? (No!) Is it a mammal? (Yes!) Is it the whole
animal? (Yes!) Is it a cat? (Yes!) Is it Fluffy? (Yeah! Laughter. . .)
So Aristotle invented that game. We ought to give Plato the credit for
having invented hide-and-seek. Democritus has already been credited with
having invented Lego.
Aristotle was a meticulous organizer who set out to clarify our concepts.
In fact, he founded the science of Logic. He demonstrated a number of laws
governing conclusions or proofs that were valid. One example will suffice. If I
first establish that all living creatures are mortal (first premise), and then
establish that Hermes is a living creature (second premise), I can then
elegantly conclude that Hermes is mortal.
The example demonstrates that Aristotles logic was based on the
correlation of terms, in this case living creature and mortal. Even though
one has to admit that the above conclusion is 100% valid, we may also add
that it hardly tells us anything new. We already knew that Hermes was
mortal. (He is a dog and all dogs are living creatureswhich are mortal,
unlike the rock of Mount Everest.) Certainly we knew that, Sophie. But the
relationship between classes of things is not always so obvious. From time to
time it can be necessary to clarify our concepts.
For example: Is it really possible that tiny little baby mice suckle just like
lambs and piglets? Mice certainly do not lay eggs. (When did I last see a
mouses egg?) So they give birth to live youngjust like pigs and sheep. But
we call animals that bear live young mammalsand mammals are animals
that feed on their mothers milk. Sowe got there. We had the answer inside
us but we had to think it through. We forgot for the moment that mice really do
suckle from their mother. Perhaps it was because we have never seen a baby
mouse being suckled, for the simple reason that mice are rather shy of humans
when they suckle their young.
Natures Scale
When Aristotle clears up in life, he first of all points out that everything
in the natural world can be divided into two main categories. On the one hand
there are nonliving things, such as stones, drops of water, or clumps of soil.
These things have no potentiality for change. According to Aristotle, nonliving
things can only change through external influence. Only living things have the
potentiality for change.
Aristotle divides living things into two different categories. One
comprises plants, and the other creatures. Finally, these creatures can also
be divided into two subcategories, namely animals and humans.
You have to admit that Aristotles categories are clear and simple. There
is a decisive difference between a living and a nonliving thing, for example a
rose and a stone, just as there is a decisive difference between a plant and an
animal, for example a rose and a horse. I would also claim that there definitely
is a difference between a horse and a man. But what exactly does this
difference consist of? Can you tell me that?
Unfortunately I do not have time to wait while you write the answer down
and put it in a pink envelope with a lump of sugar, so Ill answer myself. When
Aristotle divides natural phenomena into various categories, his criterion is the
objects characteristics, or more specifically what it can do or what it does.
All living things (plants, animals, humans) have the ability to absorb
nourishment, to grow, and to propagate. All living creatures (animals and
humans) have in addition the ability to perceive the world around them and to
move about. Moreover, all humans have the ability to thinkor otherwise to
order their perceptions into various categories and classes.
So there are in reality no sharp boundaries in the natural world. We
observe a gradual transition from simple growths to more complicated plants,
from simple animals to more complicated animals. At the top of this scale is
manwho according to Aristotle lives the whole life of nature. Man grows and
absorbs nourishment like plants, he has feelings and the ability to move like
animals, but he also has a specific characteristic peculiar to humans, and that
is the ability to think rationally.
Therefore, man has a spark of divine reason, Sophie. Yes, I did say
divine. From time to time Aristotle reminds us that there must be a God who
started all movement in the natural world. Therefore God must be at the very
top of natures scale.
Aristotle imagined the movement of the stars and the planets guiding all
movement on Earth. But there had to e something causing the heavenly
bodies to move. Aristotle called this the first mover, or God. The first
mover is itself at rest, but it is the formal cause of the movement of the
heavenly bodies, and thus of all movement in nature.
Ethics
Let us go back to man, Sophie. According to Aristotle, mans form
comprises a soul, which has a plant-like part, an animal part, and a rational
part. And now he asks: How should we live? What does it require to live a
good life? His answer: Man can only achieve happiness by using all his
abilities and capabilities.
Aristotle held that there are three forms of happiness. The first form of
happiness is a life of pleasure and enjoyment. The second form of happiness
is a life as a free and responsible citizen. The third form of happiness is a life
as thinker and philosopher.
Aristotle then emphasized that all three criteria must be present at the
same time for man to find happiness and fulfillment. He rejected all forms of
imbalance. Had he lived today he might have said that a person who only
develops his body lives a life that is just as unbalanced as someone who only
uses his head. Both extremes are an expression of a warped way of life.
The same applies in human relationships, where Aristotle advocated the
Golden Mean. We must be neither cowardly nor rash, but courageous (too
little courage is cowardice, too much is rashness), neither miserly nor extravagant
but liberal (not liberal enough is miserly, too liberal is extravagant).
The same goes for eating. It is dangerous to eat too little, but also dangerous
to eat too much. The ethics of both Plato and Aristotle contain echoes of
Greek medicine: only by exercising balance and temperance will I achieve a
happy or harmonious life.
Politics
The undesirability of cultivating extremes is also expressed in Aristotles
view of society. He says that man is by nature a political animal. Without a
society around us, we are not real people, he claimed. He pointed out that the
family and the village satisfy our primary needs of food, warmth, marriage,
and child rearing. But the highest form of human fellowship is only to be found
in the state.
This leads to the question of how the state should be organized. (You
remember Platos philosophic state?) Aristotle describes three good forms of
constitution.
One is monarchy, or kingshipwhich means there is only one head of
state. For this type of constitution to be good, it must not degenerate into
tyrannythat is, when one ruler governs the state to his own advantage.
Another good form of constitution is aristocracy, in which there is a larger or
smaller group of rulers. This constitutional form must beware of degenerating
into an oligarchywhen the government is run by a few people. An example
of that would be a junta. The third good constitutional form is what Aristotle
called polity, which means democracy. But this form also has its negative
aspect. A democracy can quickly develop into mob rule. (Even if the tyrannic
Hitler had not become head of state in Germany^ all the lesser Nazis could
have formed a terrifying mob rule.)
Views on Women
Finally, let us look at Aristotles views on women. His was unfortunately
not as uplifting as Platos. Aristotle was more inclined to believe that women
were incomplete in some way. A woman was an unfinished man. In
reproduction, woman is passive and receptive whilst man is active and
productive; for the child inherits only the male characteristics, claimed
Aristotle. He believed that all the childs characteristics lay complete in the
male sperm. The woman was the soil, receiving and bringing forth the seed,
whilst the man was the sower. Or, in Aristotelian language, the man provides
the form and the woman contributes the substance.
It is of course both astonishing and highly regrettable that an otherwise
so intelligent man could be so wrong about the relationship of the sexes. But it
demonstrates two things: first, that Aristotle could not have had much practical
experience regarding the lives of women and children, and second, it shows
how wrong things can go when men are allowed to reign supreme in the fields
of philosophy and science.
Aristotles erroneous view of the sexes was doubly harmful because it
was hisrather than Platosview that held sway throughout the Middle
Ages. The church thus inherited a view of women that is entirely without foundation
in the Bible. Jesus was certainly no woman hater!
Ill say no more. But you will be hearing from me again.
When Sophie had read the chapter on Aristotle one and a half times, she
returned it to the brown envelope and remained sitting, staring into space. She
suddenly became aware of the mess surrounding her. Books and ring binders lay
scattered on the floor. Socks and sweaters, tights and jeans hung half out of the closet.
On the chair in front of the writing desk was a huge pile of dirty laundry.
Sophie had an irresistible desire to clear up. The first thing she did was to pull
all the clothes out of the closet and onto the floor. It was necessary to start all over.
Then she began folding her things very neatly and stacking them all tidily on the
shelves. The closet had seven shelves. One was for underwear, one for socks and
tights, and one for jeans. She gradually filled up each shelf. She never had any
question about where to put anything. Dirty laundry went into a plastic bag she found
on the bottom shelf. One thing she did have trouble witha white knee-length
stocking. The problem was that the other one of the pair was missing. Whats more, it
had never been Sophies.
She examined it carefully. There was nothing to identify the owner, but Sophie
had a strong suspicion about who the owner was. She threw it up onto the top shelf to
join the Lego, the video cassette, and the red silk scarf.
Sophie turned her attention to the floor. She sorted books, ring binders,
magazines, and postersexactly as the philosophy teacher had described in the
chapter on Aristotle. When she had done that, she made her bed and got started on her
writing desk.
The last thing she did was to gather all the pages on Aristotle into a neat pile.
She fished out an empty ring binder and a hole punch, made holes in the pages, and
clipped them into the ring binder. This also went onto the top shelf. Later on in the
day she would have to bring in the cookie tin from the den.
From now on things would be kept neat. And she didnt only mean in her room.
After reading Aristotle, she realized it was just as important to keep her ideas orderly.
She had reserved the top shelf of the closet especially for that kind of thing. It was the
only place in the room that she did not yet have complete control over.
There had been no sign of life from her mother for over two hours. Sophie went
downstairs. Before she woke her mother up she decided to feed her pets.
She bent over the goldfish bowl in the kitchen. One of the fishes was black, one
orange, and one red and white. This was why she called them Black Jack, Gold-top,
and Red Ridinghood.
As she sprinkled fish food into the water she said:
You belong to Natures living creatures, you can absorb nourishment, you can
grow and reproduce yourselves. More specifically, you belong to the animal kingdom.
So you can move around and look out at the world. To be precise, you are fish, and
you breathe through your gills and can swim back and forth in the waters of life.
Sophie put the lid back on the fish food jar. She was quite satisfied with the way
she had placed the goldfish in Natures scale, and she was especially pleased with the
expression the waters of life. So now it was the budgerigars turn.
Sophie poured a little birdseed in their feeding cup and said:
Dear Smit and Smule. You have become dear little budgerigars because you
grew out of dear little budgerigar eggs, and because these eggs had the form of being
budgerigars, luckily you didnt grow into squawking parrots.
Sophie then went into the large bathroom, where the sluggish tortoise lay in a
big box. Every now and then when her mother showered, she yelled that she would
kill it one day. But so far it had been an empty threat. Sophie took a lettuce leaf from
a large jam jar and laid it in the box.
Dear Govinda, she said. You are not one of the speediest animals, but you
certainly are able to sense a tiny fraction of the great big world we live in. Youll have
to content yourself with the fact that you are not the only one who cant exceed your
own limits.
Sherekan was probably out catching micethat was a cats nature, after all.
Sophie crossed the living room toward her mothers bedroom. A vase of daffodils
stood on the coffee table. It was as if the yellow blooms bowed respectfully as Sophie
went by. She stopped for a moment and let her fingers gently brush their smooth
heads. You belong to the living part of nature too, she said. Actually, you are quite
privileged compared to the vase you are in. But unfortunately you are not able to
appreciate it.
Then Sophie tiptoed into her mothers bedroom. Although her mother was in a
deep sleep, Sophie laid a hand on her forehead.
You are one of the luckiest ones, she said, because you are not only alive
like the lilies of the field. And you are not only a living creature like Sherekan or
Govinda. You are a human, and therefore have the rare capacity of thought.
What on earth are you talking about, Sophie?
Her mother had woken up more quickly than usual.
I was just saying that you look like a lazy tortoise. I can otherwise inform you
that I have tidied up my room, with philosophic thoroughness.
Her mother lifted her head.
Ill be right there, she said. Will you put the coffee on?
Sophie did as she was asked, and they were soon sitting in the kitchen over
coffee, juice, and chocolate.
Suddenly Sophie said, Have you ever wondered why we are alive, Mom?
Oh, not again!
Yes, because now I know the answer. People live on this planet so that
someone can go around giving names to everything.
Is that right? I never thought of that.
Then you have a big problem, because a human is a thinking animal. If you
dont think, youre not really a human.
Sophie!
Imagine if there were only vegetables and animals. Then there wouldnt have
been anybody to tell the difference between cat and dog, or lily and gooseberry.
Vegetables and animals are living too, but we are the only creatures that can
categorize nature into different groups and classes.
You really are the most peculiar girl I have ever had, said her mother.
I should hope so, said Sophie. Everybody is more or less peculiar. I am a
person, so I am more or less peculiar. You have only one girl, so I am the most peculiar.
What I meant was that you scare the living daylights out of me with all that
new talk.
You are easily scared, then.
Later that afternoon Sophie went back to the den. She managed to smuggle the
big cookie tin up to her room without her mother noticing.
First she put all the pages in the right order. Then she punched holes in them
and put them in the ring binder, before the chapter on Aristotle. Finally she numbered
each page in the top right-hand corner. There were in all over fifty pages. Sophie was
in the process of compiling her own book on philosophy. It was not by her, but
written especially for her.
She had no time to do her homework for Monday. They were probably going to
have a test in Religious Knowledge, but the teacher always said he valued personal
commitment and value judgments. Sophie felt she was beginning to have a certain
basis for both.
Hellenism
... a spark from the fire
Although the philosophy teacher had begun sending his letters directly to the
old hedge, Sophie nevertheless looked in the mailbox on Monday morning, more out
of habit than anything else.
It was empty, not surprisingly. She began to walk down Clover Close.
Suddenly she noticed a photograph lying on the sidewalk. It was a picture of a
white jeep and a blue flag with the letters UN on it. Wasnt that the United Nations
flag?
Sophie turned the picture over and saw that it was a regular postcard. To Hilde
Moller Knag, c/o Sophie Amundsen ... It had a Norwegian stamp and was postmarked
UN Battalion Friday June 15, 1990.
June 15! That was Sofies birthday!
The card read:
Dear Hilde, I assume you are still celebrating your 15th birthday. Or is this the
morning after? Anyway, it makes no difference to your present. In a sense, that will
last a lifetime. But Id like to wish you a happy birthday one more time. Perhaps you
understand now why I send the cards to Sophie. I am sure she will pass them on to
you.
P.S. Mom said you had lost your wallet. I hereby promise to reimburse you the
150 crowns. You will probably be able to get another school I.D. before they close for
the summer vacation. Love from Dad.
Sophie stood glued to the spot. When was the previous card postmarked? She
seemed to recall that the postcard of the beach was also postmarked Juneeven
though it was a whole month off. She simply hadnt looked properly.
She glanced at her watch and then ran back to the house. She would just have to
be late for school today!
Sophie let herself in and leaped upstairs to her room. She found the first
postcard to Hilde under the red silk scarf. Yes! It was also postmarked June 15!
Sophies birthday and the day before the summer vacation.
Her mind was racing as she ran over to the supermarket to meet Joanna.
Who was Hilde? How could her father as good as take it for granted that Sophie
would find her? In any case, it was senseless of him to send Sophie the cards instead
of sending them directly to his daughter. It could not possibly be because he didnt
know his own daughters address. Was it a practical joke? Was he trying to surprise
his daughter on her birthday by getting a perfect stranger to play detective and
mailman? Was that why she was being given a months headstart? And was using her
as the go-between a way of giving his daughter a new girlfriend as a birthday present?
Could she be the present that would last a lifetime?
If this joker really was in Lebanon, how had he gotten hold of Sophies address?
Also, Sophie and Hilde had at least two things in common. If Hildes birthday was
June 15, they were both born on the same day. And they both had fathers who were
on the other side of the globe.
Sophie felt she was being drawn into an unnatural world. Maybe it was not so
dumb after all to believe in fate. Stillshe shouldnt be jumping to conclusions; it
could all have a perfectly natural explanation. But how had Alberto Knox found
Hildes wallet when Hilde lived in Lillesand? Lillesand was hundreds of miles away.
And why had Sophie found this postcard on her sidewalk? Did it fall out of the
mailmans bag just as he got to Sophies mailbox? If so, why should he drop this
particular card?
Are you completely insane? Joanna burst out when Sophie finally made it to
the supermarket.
Sorry!
Joanna frowned at her severely, like a schoolteacher.
Youd better have a good explanation.
It has to do with the UN, said Sophie. I was detained by hostile troops in
Lebanon.
Sure ... Youre just in love!
They ran to school as fast as their legs could carry them.
The Religious Knowledge test that Sophie had not had time to prepare for was
given out in the third period. The sheet read:
PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE AND TOLERANCE
1. Make a list of things we can know. Then make a list of things we can only
believe.
2. Indicate some of the factors contributing to a persons philosophy of life.
3. What is meant by conscience? Do you think conscience is the same for
everyone?
4. What is meant by priority of values?
Sophie sat thinking for a long time before she started to write. Could she use
any of the ideas she had learned from Alberto Knox? She was going to have to,
because she had not opened her Religious Knowledge book for days. Once she began
to write, the words simply flowed from her pen.
She wrote that we know the moon is not made of green cheese and that there are
also craters on the dark side of the moon, that both Socrates and Jesus were sentenced
to death, that everybody has to die sooner or later, that the great temples on the
Acropolis were built after the Persian wars in the fifth century B.C. and that the most
important oracle in ancient Greece was the oracle at Delphi. As examples of what we
can only believe, Sophie mentioned the questions of whether or not there is life on
other planets, whether God exists or not, whether there is life after death, and whether
Jesus was the son of God or merely a wise man. We can certainly not know where
the world came from, she wrote, completing her list. The universe can be compared
to a large rabbit pulled out of a top hat. Philosophers try to climb up one of the fine
hairs of the rabbits fur and stare straight into the eyes of the Great Magician. Whether
they will ever succeed is an open question. But if each philosopher climbed onto
another ones back, they would get even higher up in the rabbits fur, and then, in my
opinion, there would be some chance they would make it some day. P.S. In the Bible
there is something that could have been one of the fine hairs of the rabbits fur. The
hair was called the Tower of Babel, and it was destroyed because the Magician didnt
want the tiny human insects to crawl up that high out of the white rabbit he had just
created.
Then there was the next question: Indicate some of the factors contributing to a
persons philosophy of life. Upbringing and environment were important here.
People living at the time of Plato had a different philosophy of life than many people
have today because they lived in a different age and a different environment. Another
factor was the kind of experience people chose to get themselves. Common sense was
not determined by environment. Everybody had that. Maybe one could compare
environment and social situation with the conditions that existed deep down in Platos
cave. By using their intelligence individuals can start to drag themselves up from the
darkness. But a journey like that requires personal courage. Socrates is a good
example of a person who managed to free himself from the prevailing views of his
time by his own intelligence. Finally, she wrote: Nowadays, people of many lands
and cultures are being intermingled more and more. Christians, Muslims, and
Buddhists may live in the same apartment building. In which case it is more important
to accept each others beliefs than to ask why everyone does not believe the same
thing.
Not bad, thought Sophie. She certainly felt she had covered some ground with
what she had learned from her philosophy teacher. And she could always supplement
it with a dash of her own common sense and what she might have read and heard
elsewhere.
She applied herself to the third question: What is meant by conscience? Do
you think conscience is the same for everyone? This was something they had discussed
a lot in class. Sophie wrote: Conscience is peoples ability to respond to right
and wrong. My personal opinion is that everyone is endowed with this ability, so in
other words, conscience is innate. Socrates would have said the same. But just what
conscience dictates can vary a lot from one person to the next. One could say that the
Sophists had a point here. They thought that right and wrong is something mainly
determined by the environment the individual grows up in. Socrates, on the other
hand, believed that conscience is the same for everyone. Perhaps both views were
right. Even if everybody doesnt feel guilty about showing themselves naked, most
people will have a bad conscience if they are really mean to someone. Still, it must be
remembered that having a conscience is not the same as using it. Sometimes it looks
as if people act quite unscrupulously, but I believe they also have a kind of conscience
somewhere, deep down. Just as it seems as if some people have no sense at all, but
thats only because they are not using it. P.S. Common sense and conscience can both
be compared to a muscle. If you dont use a muscle, it gets weaker and weaker.
Now there was only one question left: What is meant by priority of values?
This was another thing they had discussed a lot lately. For example, it could be of
value to drive a car and get quickly from one place to another. But if driving led to
deforestation and polluting the natural environment, you were facing a choice of
values. After careful consideration Sophie felt she had come to the conclusion that
healthy forests and a pure environment were more valuable than getting to work
quickly. She gave several more examples. Finally she wrote: Personally, I think
Philosophy is a more important subject than English Grammar. It would therefore be a
sensible priority of values to have Philosophy on the timetable and cut down a bit on
English lessons.
In the last break the teacher drew Sophie aside.
I have already read your Religion test, he said. It was near the top of the
pile.
I hope it gave you some food for thought.
That was exactly what I wanted to talk to you about. It was in many ways very
mature. Surprisingly so. And self-reliant. But had you done your homework, Sophie?
Sophie fidgeted a little.
Well, you did say it was important to have a personal point of view.
Well, yes I did ... but there are limits.
Sophie looked him straight in the eye. She felt she could permit herself this after
all she had experienced lately.
I have started studying philosophy, she said. It gives one a good background
for personal opinions.
But it doesnt make it easy for me to grade your paper. It will either be a D or
an A.
Because I was either quite right or quite wrong? Is that what youre saying?
So lets say A, said the teacher. But next time, do your homework!
When Sophie got home from school that afternoon, she flung her schoolbag on
the steps and ran down to the den. A brown envelope lay on top of the gnarled roots.
It was quite dry around the edges, so it must have been a long time since Hermes had
dropped it.
She took the envelope with her and let herself in the front door. She fed the
animals and then went upstairs to her room. Lying on her bed, she opened Albertos
letter and read:
HELLENISM
Here we are again, Sophie! Having read about the natural philosophers
and Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, you are now familiar with the foundations
of European philosophy. So from now on we will drop the introductory questions
which you earlier received in white envelopes. I imagine you probably
have plenty of other assignments and tests at school.
I shall now tell you about the long period from Aristotle near the end of
the fourth century B.C. right up to the early Middle Ages around A.D. 400.
Notice that we can now write both B.C. and A.D. because Christianity was in
fact one of the most important, and the most mysterious, factors of the period.
Aristotle died in the year 322 B.C., at the time when Athens had lost its
dominant role. This was not least due to the political upheavals resulting from
the conquests of Alexander the Great (356-323 B.C.).
Alexander the Great was the King of Macedonia. Aristotle was also from
Macedonia, and for a time he was even the young Alexanders tutor. It was
Alexander who won the final, decisive victory over the Persians. And
moreover, Sophie, with his many conquests he linked both Egypt and the
Orient as far east as India to the Greek civilization.
This marked the beginning of a new epoch in the history of mankind. A
civilization sprang up in which Greek culture and the Greek language played a
leading role. This period, which lasted for about 300 years, is known as
Hellenism. The term Hellenism refers to both the period of time and the
Greek-dominated culture that prevailed in the three Hellenistic kingdoms of
Macedonia, Syria, and
Egypt-
However, from about the year 50 B.C., Rome secured the upper hand in
military and political affairs. The new superpower gradually conquered all the
Hellenistic kingdoms, and from then on Roman culture and the Latin language
were predominant from Spain in the west to far into Asia. This was the
beginning of the Roman period, which we often refer to as Late Antiquity. But
remember one thingbefore the Romans managed to conquer the Hellenistic
world, Rome itself was a province of Greek culture. So Greek culture and
Greek philosophy came to play an important role long after the political
influence of the Greeks was a thing of the past.
Religion, Philosophy and Science
Hellenism was characterized by the fact that the borders between the
various countries and cultures became erased. Previously the Greeks, the
Romans, the Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Syrians, and the Persians had
worshipped their own gods within what we generally call a national religion.
Now the different cultures merged into one great witchs caldron of religious,
philosophical, -and scientific ideas.
We could perhaps say that the town square was replaced by the world
arena. The old town square had also buzzed with voices, bringing now
different wares to market, now different thoughts and ideas. The new aspect
was that town squares were being filled with wares and ideas from all over the
world. The voices were buzzing in many different languages.
We have already mentioned that the Greek view of life was now much
more widespread than it had been in the former Greek cultural areas. But as
time went on, Oriental gods were also worshipped in all the Mediterranean
countries. New religious formations arose that could draw on the gods and the
beliefs of many of the old nations. This is called syncretism or the fusion of
creeds.
Prior to this, people had felt a strong affinity with their own folk and their
own city-state. But as the borders and boundaries became erased, many
people began to experience doubt and uncertainty about their philosophy of
life. Late Antiquity was generally characterized by religious doubts, cultural
dissolution, and pessimism. It was said that the world has grown old.
A common feature of the new religious formations during the Hellenistic
period was that they frequently contained teachings about how mankind could
attain salvation from death. These teachings were often secret. By accepting
the teachings and performing certain rituals, a believer could hope for the
immortality of the soul and eternal life. A certain insight into the true nature of
the universe could be just as important for the salvation of the soul as
religious rituals.
So much for the new religions, Sophie. But philosophy was also moving
increasingly in the direction of salvation and serenity. Philosophic insight, it
was now thought, did not only have its own reward; it should also free
mankind from pessimism and the fear of death. Thus the boundaries between
religion and philosophy were gradually eliminated.
In general, the philosophy of Hellenism was not star-tlingly original. No
new Plato or Aristotle appeared on the scene. On the contrary, the three great
Athenian philosophers were a source of inspiration to a number of philosophic
trends which I shall briefly describe in a moment.
Hellenistic science, too, was influenced by a blend of knowledge from
the various cultures. The town of Alexandria played a key role here as a
meeting place between East and West. While Athens remained the center of
philosophy with still functioning schools of philosophy after Plato and Aristotle,
Alexandria became the center for science. With its extensive library, it
became the center for mathematics, astronomy, biology, and medicine.
Hellenistic culture could well be compared to the world of today. The
twentieth century has also been influenced by an increasingly open
civilization. In our own time, too, this opening out has resulted in tremendous
upheavals for religion and philosophy. And just as in Rome around the
beginning of the Christian era one could come across Greek, Egyptian, and
Oriental religions, today, as we approach the end of the twentieth century, we
can find in all European cities of any size religions from all parts of the world.
We also see nowadays how a conglomeration of old and new religions,
philosophies, and sciences can form the basis of new offers on the view-oflife
market. Much of this new knowledge is actually the flotsam of old
thought, some of whose roots go back to Hellenism.
As I have said, Hellenistic philosophy continued to work with the
problems raised by Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Common to them all was
their desire to discover how mankind should best live and die. They were
concerned with ethics. In the new civilization, this became the central philosophical
project. The main emphasis was on finding out what true happiness
was and how it could be achieved. We are going to look at four of these
philosophical trends.
The Cynics
The story goes that one day Socrates stood gazing at a stall that sold all
kinds of wares. Finally he said, What a lot of things I dont need!
This statement could be the motto for the Cynic school of philosophy,
founded by Antisthenes in Athens around 400 B.C.
Antisthenes had been a pupil of Socrates, and had become particularly
interested in his frugality.
The Cynics emphasized that true happiness is not found in external
advantages such as material luxury, political power, or good health. True
happiness lies in not being dependent on such random and fleeting things.
And because happiness does not consist in benefits of this kind, it is within
everyones reach. Moreover, having once been attained, it can never be lost.
The best known of the Cynics was Diogenes, a pupil of Antisthenes, who
reputedly lived in a barrel and owned nothing but a cloak, a stick, and a bread
bag. (So it wasnt easy to steal his happiness from him!) One day while he
was sitting beside his barrel enjoying the sun, he was visited by Alexander the
Great. The emperor stood before him and asked if there was anything he
could do for him. Was there anything he desired? Yes, Diogenes replied.
Stand to one side. Youre blocking the sun. Thus Diogenes showed that he
was no less happy and rich than the great man before him. He had everything
he desired.
The Cynics believed that people did not need to be concerned about
their own health. Even suffering and death should not disturb them. Nor
should they let themselves be tormented by concern for other peoples woes.
Nowadays the terms cynical and cynicism have come to mean a sneering
disbelief in human sincerity, and they imply insensitivity to other peoples
suffering.
The Stoics
The Cynics were instrumental in the development of the Stoic school of
philosophy, which grew up in Athens around 300 B.C. Its founder was Zeno,
who came originally from Cyprus and joined the Cynics in Athens after being
shipwrecked. He used to gather his followers under a portico. The name
Stoic comes from the Greek word for portico (stoo). Stoicism was later to
have great significance for Roman culture.
Like Heraclitus, the Stoics believed that everyone was a part of the
same common senseor logos. They thought that each person was like a
world in miniature, or microcosmos, which is a reflection of the macrocosmos.
This led to the thought that there exists a universal right-ness, the socalled
natural law. And because this natural law was based on timeless
human and universal reason, it did not alter with time and place. In this, then,
the Stoics sided with Socrates against the Sophists.
Natural law governed all mankind, even slaves. The Stoics considered
the legal statutes of the various states merely as incomplete imitations of the
law embedded in nature itself.
In the same way that the Stoics erased the difference between the
individual and the universe, they also denied any conflict between spirit and
matter. There is only one nature, they averred. This kind of idea is called
monism (in contrast to Platos clear dualism or two-fold reality).
As true children of their time, the Stoics were distinctly cosmopolitan, in
that they were more receptive to contemporary culture than the barrel
philosophers (the Cynics). They drew attention to human fellowship, they
were preoccupied with politics, and many of them, notably the Roman
Emperor Marcus Aurelius (A.D. 121-180), were active statesmen. They
encouraged Greek culture and philosophy in Rome, one of the most
distinguished of them being the orator, philosopher, and statesman Cicero
(106-43 B.C.). It was he who formed the very concept of humanismthat is,
a view of life that has the individual as its central focus. Some years later, the
Stoic Seneca (4 B.C.-A.D. 65) said that to mankind, mankind is holy. This
has remained a slogan for humanism ever since.
The Stoics, moreover, emphasized that all natural processes, such as
sickness and death, follow the unbreakable laws of nature. Man must
therefore learn to accept his destiny. Nothing happens accidentally.
Everything happens through necessity, so it is of little use to complain when
fate comes knocking at the door. One must also accept the happy events of
life unperturbed, they thought. In this we see their kinship with the Cynics,
who claimed that all external events were unimportant. Even today we use the
term stoic calm about someone who does not let his feelings take over.
The Epicureans
As we have seen, Socrates was concerned with finding out how man
could live a good life. Both the Cynics and the Stoics interpreted his
philosophy as meaning that man had to free himself from material luxuries.
But Socrates also had a pupil named Aristippus. He believed that the aim of
life was to attain the highest possible sensory enjoyment. The highest good is
pleasure, he said, the greatest evil is pain. So he wished to develop a way
of life whose aim was to avoid pain in all forms. (The Cynics and the Stoics
believed in enduring pain of all kinds, which is not the same as setting out to
avoid pain.)
Around the year 300 B.C., Epicurus (341-270) founded a school of
philosophy in Athens. His followers were called Epicureans. He developed the
pleasure ethic of Aristippus and combined it with the atom theory of
Democritus.
The story goes that the Epicureans lived in a garden. They were
therefore known as the garden philosophers. Above the entrance to this
garden there is said to have hung a notice saying, Stranger, here you will live
well. Here pleasure is the highest good.
Epicurus emphasized that the pleasurable results of an action must
always be weighed against its possible side effects. If you have ever binged
on chocolate you know what I mean. If you havent, try this exercise: Take all
your saved-up pocket money and buy two hundred crowns worth of
chocolate. (Well assume you like chocolate.) It is essential to this exercise
that you eat it all at one time. About half an hour later, when all that delicious
chocolate is eaten, you will understand what Epicurus meant by side effects.
Epicurus also believed that a pleasurable result in the short term must
be weighed against the possibility of a greater, more lasting, or more intense
pleasure in the long term. (Maybe you abstain from eating chocolate for a
whole year because you prefer to save up all your pocket money and buy a
new bike or go on an expensive vacation abroad.) Unlike animals, we are able
to plan our lives. We have the ability to make a pleasure calculation.
Chocolate is good, but a new bike or a trip to England is better.
Epicurus emphasized, though, that pleasure does not necessarily
mean sensual pleasurelike eating chocolate, for instance. Values such as
friendship and the appreciation of art also count. Moreover, the enjoyment of
life required the old Greek ideals of self-control, temperance, and serenity.
Desire must be curbed, and serenity will help us to endure pain.
Fear of the gods brought many people to the garden of Epicurus. In this
connection, the atom theory of Democritus was a useful cure for religious
superstitions. In order to live a good life it is not unimportant to overcome the
fear of death. To this end Epicurus made use of Democrituss theory of the
soul atoms. You may perhaps remember that Democritus believed there
was no life after death because when we die, the soul atoms disperse in all
directions.
Death does not concern us, Epicurus said quite simply, because as
long as we exist, death is not here. And when it does come, we no longer
exist. (When you think about it, no one has ever been bothered by being
dead.)
Epicurus summed up his liberating philosophy with what he called the
four medicinal herbs:
The gods are not to be feared. Death is nothing to worry about. Good is
easy to attain. The fearful is easy to endure.
From a Greek point of view, there was nothing new in comparing
philosophical projects with those of medical science. The intention was simply
that man should equip himself with a philosophic medicine chest containing
the four ingredients I mentioned.
In contrast to the Stoics, the Epicureans showed little or no interest in
politics and the community. Live in seclusion! was the advice of Epicurus.
We could perhaps compare his garden with our present-day communes.
There are many people in our own time who have sought a safe harbor
away from society.
After Epicurus, many Epicureans developed an overemphasis on selfindulgence.
Their motto was Live for the moment! The word epicurean is
used in a negative sense nowadays to describe someone who lives only for
pleasure.
Neoplatonism
As I showed you, Cynicism, Stoicism, and Epicureanism all had their
roots in the teaching of Socrates. They also made use of certain of the pre-
Socratics like Heraclitus and Democritus.
But the most remarkable philosophic trend in the late Hellenistic period
was first and foremost inspired by Platos philosophy. We therefore call it
Neoplatonism.
The most important figure in Neoplatonism was Plotinus (c. 205-270),
who studied philosophy in Alexandria but later settled in Rome. It is interesting
to note that he came from Alexandria, the city that had been the central meeting
point for Greek philosophy and Oriental mysticism for several centuries.
Plotinus brought with him to Rome a doctrine of salvation that was to compete
seriously with Christianity when its time came. However, Neoplatonism also
became a strong influence in mainstream Christian theology as well.
Remember Platos doctrine of ideas, Sophie, and the way he
distinguished between the world of ideas and the sensory world. This meant
establishing a clear division between the soul and the body. Man thus became
a dual creature: our body consisted of earth and dust like everything else in
the sensory world, but we also had an immortal soul. This was widely believed
by many Greeks long before Plato. Plotinus was also familiar with similar
ideas from Asia.
Plotinus believed that the world is a span between two poles. At one end
is the divine light which he calls the One. Sometimes he calls it God. At the
other end is absolute darkness, which receives none of the light from the One.
But Plotinuss point is that this darkness actually has no existence. It is simply
the absence of lightin other words, it is not. All that exists is God, or the
One, but in the same way that a beam of light grows progressively dimmer
and is gradually extinguished, there is somewhere a point that the divine glow
cannot reach.
According to Plotinus, the soul is illuminated by the light from the One,
while matter is the darkness that has no real existence. But the forms in
nature have a faint glow of the One.
Imagine a great burning bonfire in the night from which sparks fly in all
directions. A wide radius of light from the bonfire turns night into day in the
immediate area; but the glow from the fire is visible even from a distance of
several miles. If we went even further away, we would be able to see a tiny
speck of light like a far-off lantern in the dark, and if we went on moving away,
at some point the light would not reach us. Somewhere the rays of light disappear
into the night, and when it is completely dark we see nothing. There are
neither shapes nor shadows.
Imagine now that reality is a bonfire like this. That which is burning is
Godand the darkness beyond is the cold matter that man and animals are
made of. Closest to God are the eternal ideas which are the primal forms of all
creatures. The human soul, above all, is a spark from the fire. Yet
everywhere in nature some of the divine light is shining. We can see it in all
living creatures; even a rose or a bluebell has its divine glow. Furthest away
from the living God are earth and water and stone.
I am saying that there is something of the divine mystery in everything
that exists. We can see it sparkle in a sunflower or a poppy. We sense more
of this unfathomable mystery in a butterfly that flutters from a twigor in a
goldfish swimming in a bowl. But we are closest to God in our own soul. Only
there can we become one with the great mystery of life. In truth, at very rare
moments we can experience that we ourselves are that divine mystery.
Plotinuss metaphor is rather like Platos myth of the cave: the closer we
get to the mouth of the cave, the closer we get to that which all existence
springs from. But in contrast to Platos clear two-fold reality, Plotinuss
doctrine is characterized by an experience of wholeness. Everything is one
for everything is God. Even the shadows deep down in Platos cave have a
faint glow of the One.
On rare occasions in his life, Plotinus experienced a fusion of his soul
with God. We usually call this a mystical experience. Plotinus is not alone in
having had such experiences. People have told of them at all times and in all
cultures. The details might be different, but the essential features are the
same. Let us take a look at some of these features.
Mysticism
A mystical experience is an experience of merging with God or the
cosmic spirit. Many religions emphasize the gulf between God and Creation,
but the mystic experiences no such gulf. He or she has experienced being
one with God or merging with Him.
The idea is that what we usually call I is not the true I. In short
glimpses we can experience an identification with a greater I. Some mystics
call it God, others call it the cosmic spirit, Nature, or the Universe. When the
fusion happens, the mystic feels that he is losing himself; he disappears into
God or is lost in God in the same way that a drop of water loses itself when it
merges with the sea. An Indian mystic once expressed it in this way: When I
was, God was not. When God is, I am no more. The Christian mystic Angelus
Silesius (1624-1677) put it another way: Every drop becomes the sea when it
flows oceanward, just as at last the soul ascends and thus becomes the Lord.
Now you might feel that it cannot be particularly pleasant to lose
oneself. I know what you mean. But the point is that what you lose is so very
much less than what you gain. You lose yourself only in the form you have at
the moment, but at the same time you realize that you are something much
bigger. You are the universe. In fact, you are the cosmic spirit itself, Sophie. It
is you who are God. If you have to lose yourself as Sophie Amundsen, you
can take comfort in the knowledge that this everyday I is something you will
lose one day anyway. Your real I which you can only experience if you are
able to lose yourselfis, according to the mystics, like a mysterious fire that
goes on burning to all eternity.
But a mystical experience like this does not always come of itself. The
mystic may have to seek the path of purification and enlightenment to his
meeting with God. This path consists of the simple life and various meditation
techniques. Then all at once the mystic achieves his goal, and can exclaim, I
am God or I am You.
Mystical trends are found in all the great world religions. And the
descriptions of mystical experiences given by the mystics show a remarkable
similarity across all cultural boundaries. It is in the mystics attempt to provide
a religious or philosophic interpretation of the mystical experience that his
cultural background reveals itself.
In Western mysticismthat is, within Judaism, Christianity, and Islam
the mystic emphasizes that his meeting is with a personal God. Although God
is present both in nature and in the human soul, he is also far above and
beyond the world. In Eastern mysticismthat is, Hinduism, Buddhism, and
Chinese religionit is more usual to emphasize that the mystic experiences a
total fusion with God or the cosmic spirit.
I am the cosmic spirit, the mystic can exclaim, or I am God. For God
is not only present in the world; he has nowhere else to be.
In India, especially, there have been strong mystical movements since
long before the time of Plato. Swami Vivekenanda, an Indian who was
instrumental in bringing Hinduism to the west, once said, Just as certain
world religions say that people who do not believe in a personal God outside
themselves are atheists, we say that a person who does not believe in himself
is an atheist. Not believing in the splendor of ones own soul is what we call
atheism.
A mystical experience can also have ethical significance. A former
president of India, Sarvepalli Radhak-rishnan, said once, Love thy neighbor
as thyself because you ore your neighbor. It is an illusion that makes you think
that your neighbor is someone other than yourself.
People of our own time who do not adhere to a particular religion also
tell of mystical experiences. They have suddenly experienced something they
have called cosmic consciousness or an oceanic feeling. They have felt
themselves wrenched out of Time and have experienced the world from the
perspective of eternity.
Sophie sat up in bed. She had to feel whether she still had a body. As she read
more and more about Plato and the mystics, she had begun to feel as though she were
floating around in the room, out of the window and far off above the town. From there
she had looked down on all the people in the square, and had floated on and on over
the globe that was her home, over the North Sea and Europe, down over the Sahara
and across the African savanna.
The whole world had become almost like a living person, and it felt as if that
person were Sophie herself. The world is me, she thought. The great big universe that
she had often felt to be unfathomable and terrifyingwas her own I. Now, too, the
universe was enormous and majestic, but now it was herself who was so big.
The extraordinary feeling was fleeting, but Sophie was sure she would never
forget it. It felt as if something inside her had burst through her forehead and become
merged with everything else, the way a drop of color can tint a whole jug of water.
When it was all over, it was like waking up with a headache after a wonderful
dream. Sophie registered with a touch of disillusionment that she had a body which
was trying to sit up in bed. Lying on her stomach reading the pages from Alberto
Knox had given her a backache. But she had experienced something unforgettable.
Eventually she pulled herself together and stood up. The first thing she did was
to punch holes in the pages and file them in her ring binder together with the other
lessons. Then she .went into the garden.
The birds were singing as if the world had just been born. The pale green of the
birches behind the old rabbit hutches was so intense that it seemed as though the Creator
had not yet finished blending the color.
Could she really believe that everything was one divine I? Could she believe
that she carried within her a soul that was a spark from the fire? If it was true, then
she was truly a divine creature.
The Postcards
Im imposing a severe censorship on myself
Several days went by without any word from the philosophy teacher. Tomorrow
was Thursday, May 17 Norways national day. School would be closed on the 18th
as well. As they walked home after school Joanna suddenly exclaimed, Lets go
camping!
Sophies immediate reaction was that she couldnt be away from the house for
long. But then she said, Sure, why not?
A couple of hours later Joanna arrived at Sophies door with a large backpack.
Sophie had packed hers as well, and she also had the tent. They both had bedrolls and
sweaters, groundsheets and flashlights, large-size thermos bottles and plenty of their
favorite food.
When Sophies mother got home around five oclock, she gave them a sermon
about what they must and must not do. She also insisted on knowing where they were
going to set up camp.
They told her they intended to make for Grouse Top. They might be lucky
enough to hear the mating call of the grouse next morning.
Sophie had an ulterior motive for choosing that particular spot. She thought that
Grouse Top must be pretty close to the majors cabin. Something was urging her to
return to it, but she didnt dare go alone.
The two girls walked down the path that led from the little cul-de-sac just
beyond Sophies garden gate. They chatted about this and that, and Sophie enjoyed
taking a little time off from everything having to do with philosophy.
By eight oclock they had pitched their tent in a clearing by Grouse Top. They
had prepared themselves for the night and their bedrolls were unfolded. When they
had eaten their sandwiches, Sophie asked, Have you ever heard of the majors
cabin?
The majors cabin?
Theres a hut in the woods somewhere near here ... by a little lake. A strange
man lived there once, a major, thats why its called the majors cabin.
Does anyone live there now?
Do you want to go and see?
Where is it?
Sophie pointed in among the trees.
Joanna was not particularly eager, but in the end they set out. The sun was low
in the sky.
They walked in between the tall pine trees at first, but soon they were pushing
their way through bush and thicket. Eventually they made their way down to a path.
Could it be the path Sophie had followed that Sunday morning?
It must have beenalmost at once she could point to something shining
between the trees to the right of the path.
Its in there, she said.
They were soon standing at the edge of the small lake. Sophie gazed at the cabin
across the water. All the windows were now shuttered up. The red building was the
most deserted place she had seen for ages.
Joanna turned toward her. Do we have to walk on the water?
Of course not. Well row.
Sophie pointed down into the reeds. There lay the rowboat, just as before.
Have you been here before?
Sophie shook her head. Trying to explain her previous visit would be far too
complicated. And then she would have to tell her friend about Alberto Knox and the
philosophy course as well.
They laughed and joked as they rowed across the water. When they reached the
opposite bank, Sophie made sure they drew the boat well up on land.
They went to the front door. As there was obviously nobody in the cabin,
Joanna tried the door handle.
Locked... you didnt expect it to be open, did you?
Maybe we can find a key, said Sophie.
She began to search in the crevices of the stonework foundation.
Oh, lets go back to the tent instead, said Joanna after a few minutes.
But just then Sophie exclaimed, Here it is! I found it!
She held up the key triumphantly. She put it in the lock and the door swung
open.
The two friends sneaked inside as if they were up to something criminal. It was
cold and dark in the cabin.
We cant see a thing! said Joanna.
But Sophie had thought of that. She took a box of matches out of her pocket and
struck one. They only had time to see that the cabin was deserted before the match
went out. Sophie struck another, and this time she noticed a stump of candle in a
wrought-iron candlestick on top of the stove. She lit it with the third match and the
little room became light enough for them to look around.
Isnt it odd that such a small candle can light up so much darkness? said
Sophie.
Her friend nodded.
But somewhere the light disappears into the dark, Sophie went on. Actually,
darkness has no existence of its own. Its only a lack of light.
Joanna shivered. Thats creepy! Come on, lets go...
Not before weve looked in the mirror.
Sophie pointed to the brass mirror hanging above the chest of drawers, just as
before.
Thats really pretty! said Joanna.
But its a magic mirror.
Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the fairest of them all?
Im not kidding, Joanna. I am sure you can look in it and see something on the
other side.
Are you sure youve never been here before? And why is it so amusing to
scare me all the time?
Sophie could not answer that one.
Sorry.
Now it was Joanna who suddenly discovered something lying on the floor in the
corner. It was a small box. Joanna picked it up.
Postcards, she said.
Sophie gasped.
Dont touch them! Do you heardont you dare touch them!
Joanna jumped. She threw the box down as if she had burnt herself. The
postcards were strewn all over the floor. The next second she began to laugh.
Theyre only postcards!
Joanna sat down on the floor and started to pick them up. After a while Sophie
sat down beside her.
Lebanon ... Lebanon ... Lebanon ... They are all postmarked in Lebanon,
Joanna discovered.
I know, said Sophie.
Joanna sat bolt upright and looked Sophie in the eye.
So you have been here before!
Yes, I guess I have.
It suddenly struck her that it would have been a whole lot easier if she had just
admitted she had been here before. It couldnt do any harm if she let her friend in on
the mysterious things she had experienced during the last few days.
I didnt want to tell you before we were here.
Joanna began to read the cards.
They are all addressed to someone called Hilde Moller Knag.
Sophie had not touched the cards yet.
What address?
Joanna read: Hilde Moller Knag, c/o Alberto Knox, Lillesand, Norway.
Sophie breathed a sigh of relief. She was afraid they would say c/o Sophie
Amundsen.
She began to inspect them more closely.
April 28 ... May 4 ... May 6 ... May 9 ... They were stamped a few days ago.
But theres something else. All the postmarks are Norwegian! Look at that...
UN Battalion ... the stamps are Norwegian too!
I think thats the way they do it. They have to be sort of neutral, so they have
their own Norwegian post office down there.
But how do they get the mail home?
The air force, probably.
Sophie put the candlestick on the floor, and the two friends began to read the
cards. Joanna arranged them in chronological order and read the first card:
Dear Hilde, I cant wait to come home to Lillesand. I expect to land at Kjevik
airport early evening on Midsummer Eve. I would much rather have arrived in time
for your 15th birthday but Im under military command of course. To make up for it, I
promise to devote all my loving care to the huge present you are getting for your
birthday.
With love from someone who is always thinking about his daughters future.
P.S. Im sending a copy of this card to our mutual friend. I know you
understand, Hilde. At the moment Im being very secretive, but you will understand.
Sophie picked up the next card:
Dear Hilde, Down here we take one day at a time. If there is one thing Im
going to remember from these months in Lebanon, its all this waiting. But Im doing
what I can so you have as great a 15th birthday as possible. I cant say any more at the
moment. Im imposing a severe censorship on myself. Love, Dad.
The two friends sat breathless with excitement. Neither of them spoke, they just
read what was written on the cards:
My dear child, What I would like best would be to send you my secret thoughts
with a white dove. But they are all out of white doves in Lebanon. If there is anything
this war-torn country needs, it is white doves. I pray the UN will truly manage to
make peace in the world some day.
P.S. Maybe your birthday present can be shared with other people. Lets talk
about that when I get home. But you still have no idea what Im talking about, right?
Love from someone who has plenty of time to think for the both of us.
When they had read six cards, there was only one left. It read:
Dear Hilde, I am now so bursting with all these secrets for your birthday that I
have to stop myself several times a day from calling home and blowing the whole
thing. It is something that simply grows and grows. And as you know, when a thing
gets bigger and bigger its more difficult to keep it to yourself. Love from Dad.
P.S. Some day you will meet a girl called Sophie. To give you both a chance to
get to know more about each other before you meet, I have begun sending her copies
of all the cards I send to you. I expect she will soon begin to catch on, Hilde. As yet
she knows no more than you. She has a girlfriend called Joanna. Maybe site can be of
help?
After reading the last card, Joanna and Sophie sat quite still staring wildly at
each other. Joanna was holding Sophies wrist in a tight grip.
Im scared, she said.
So am I.
When was the last card stamped?
Sophie looked again at the card.
May 16, she said. Thats today.
It cant be! cried Joanna, almost angrily.
They examined the postmark carefully, but there was no mistaking it... 05-16-
90.
Its impossible, insisted Joanna. And I cant imagine who could have written
it. It must be someone who knows us. But how could they know we would come here
on this particular day?
Joanna was by far the more scared of the two. The business with Hilde and her
father was nothing new to Sophie.
I think it has something to do with the brass mirror.
Joanna jumped again.
You dont actually think the cards come fluttering out of the mirror the minute
they are stamped in Lebanon?
Do you have a better explanation?
No.
Sophie got to her feet and held the candle up in front of the two portraits on the
wall. Joanna came over and peered at the pictures.
Berkeley and Bjerkely. What does that mean?
I have no idea.
The candle was almost burnt down.
Lets go, said Joanna. Come on!
We must just take the mirror with us.
Sophie reached up and unhooked the large brass mirror from the wall above the
chest of drawers. Joanna tried to stop her but Sophie would not be deterred.
When they got outside it was as dark as a May night can get. There was enough
light in the sky for the clear outlines of bushes and trees to be visible. The small lake
lay like a reflection of the sky above it. The two girls rowed pensively across to the
other side.
Neither of them spoke much on the way back to the tent, but each knew that the
other was thinking intensely about what they had seen. Now and then a frightened
bird would start up, and a couple of times they heard the hooting of an owl.
As soon as they reached the tent, they crawled into their bedrolls. Joanna
refused to have the mirror inside the tent. Before they fell asleep, they agreed that it
was scary enough, knowing it was just outside the tent flap. Sophie had also taken the
postcards and put them in one of the pockets of her backpack.
They woke early next morning. Sophie was up first. She put her boots on and
went outside the tent. There lay the large mirror in the grass, covered with dew.
Sophie wiped the dew off with her sweater and gazed down at her own
reflection. It was as if she was looking down and up at herself at the same time.
Luckily she found no early morning postcard from Lebanon.
Above the broad clearing behind the tent a ragged morning mist was drifting
slowly into little wads of cotton. Small birds were chirping energetically but Sophie
could neither see nor hear any grouse.
The girls put on extra sweaters and ate their breakfast outside the tent. Their
conversation soon turned to the majors cabin and the mysterious cards.
After breakfast they folded up the tent and set off for home. Sophie carried the
large mirror under her arm. From time to time she had to restJoanna refused to
touch it.
As they approached the outskirts of the town they heard a few sporadic shots.
Sophie recalled what Hildes father had written about war-torn Lebanon, and she realized
how lucky she was to have been born in a peaceful country. The shots they
heard came from innocent fireworks celebrating the national holiday.
Sophie invited Joanna in for a cup of hot chocolate. Her mother was very
curious to know where they had found the mirror. Sophie told her they had found it
outside the majors cabin, and her mother repeated the story about nobody having
lived there for many years.
When Joanna had gone, Sophie put on a red dress. The rest of the Norwegian
national day passed quite normally. In the evening, the TV news had a feature on how
the Norwegian UN battalion had celebrated the day in Lebanon. Sophies eyes were
glued to the screen. One of the men she was seeing could be Hildes father.
The last thing Sophie did on May 17 was to hang the large mirror on the wall in
her room. The following morning there was a new brown envelope in the den. She
tore it open at once and began to read.
Two Cultures
... the only way to avoid floating in a vacuum 
It wont be long now before we meet, my dear Sophie. I thought you
would return to the majors cabinthats why I left all the cards from Hildes
father there. That was the only way they could be delivered to her. Dont worry
about how she will get them. A lot can happen before June 15.
We have seen how the Hellenistic philosophers recycled the ideas of
earlier philosophers. Some even attempted to turn their predecessors into
religious prophets. Plotinus came close to acclaiming Plato as the savior of
humanity.
But as we know, another savior was born during the period we have just
been discussingand that happened outside the Greco-Roman area. I refer
to Jesus of Nazareth. In this chapter we will see how Christianity gradually
began to permeate the Greco-Roman worldmore or less the same way that
Hildes world has gradually begun to permeate ours.
Jesus was a jew, and the Jews belong to Semitic culture. The Greeks
and the Romans belong to Indo-European culture. European civilization has
its roots in both cultures. But before we take a closer look at the way
Christianity influenced Greco-Roman culture, we must examine these roots.
THE INDO-EUROPEANS
By Indo-European we mean all the nations and cultures that use Indo-
European languages. This covers all European nations except those whose
inhabitants speak one of the Finno-Ugrian languages (Lapp, Finnish,
Estonian, and Hungarian) or Basque. In addition, most Indian and Iranian
languages belong to the Indo-European family of languages.
About 4,000 years ago, the primitive Indo-Europeans lived in areas
bordering on the Black Sea and the Caspian Sea. From there, waves of these
Indo-European tribes began to wander southeast into Iran and India,
southwest to Greece, Italy, and Spain, westward through Central Europe to
France and Britain, northwestward to Scandinavia and northward to Eastern
Europe and Russia. Wherever they went, the Indo-Europeans assimilated
with the local culture, although Indo-European languages and Indo-European
religion came to play a dominant role.
The ancient Indian Veda scriptures and Greek philosophy, and for that
matter Snorri Sturlusons mythology are all written in related languages. But it
is not only the languages that are related. Related languages often lead to
related ideas. This is why we usually speak of an Indo-European culture.
The culture of the Indo-Europeans was influenced most of all by their
belief in many gods. This is called polytheism. The names of these gods as
well as much of the religious terminology recur throughout the whole Indo-
European area. Ill give you a few examples:
The ancient Indians worshipped the celestial god Dyaus, which in
Sanskrit means the sky, day, heaven/ Heaven. In Greek this god is called
Zeus, in Latin, Jupiter (actually iov-pater, or Father Heaven), and in Old
Norse, Tyr. So the names Dyaus, Zeus, lov, and Tyr are dialectal variants of
the same word.
You probably learned that the old Vikings believed in gods which they
called Aser. This is another word we find recurring all over the Indo-European
area. In Sanskrit, the ancient classical language of India, the gods are called
asura and in Persian Ahura. Another word for god is deva in Sanskrit, claeva
in Persian, deus in Latin and tivurr in Old Norse.
In Viking times, people also believed in a special group of fertility gods
(such as Niord, Freyr, and Freyja). These gods were referred to by a special
collective name, vaner, a word that is related to the Latin name for the
goddess of fertility, Venus. Sanskrit has the related word van/, which means
desire.
There is also a clear affinity to be observed in some of the Indo-
European myths. In Snorris stories of the Old Norse gods, some of the myths
are similar to the myths of India that were handed down from two to three
thousand years earlier. Although Snorris myths reflect the Nordic
environment and the Indian myths reflect the Indian, many of them retain
traces of a common origin. We can see these traces most clearly in myths
about immortal potions and the struggles of the gods against the monsters of
chaos.
We can also see clear similarities in modes of thought across the Indo-
European cultures. A typical likeness is the way the world is seen as being the
subject of a drama in which the forces of Good and Evil confront each other in
a relentless struggle. Indo-Europeans have therefore often tried to predict
how the battles between Good and Evil will turn out.
One could say with some truth that it was no accident that Greek
philosophy originated in the Indo-European sphere of culture. Indian, Greek,
and Norse mythology all have obvious leanings toward a philosophic, or
speculative, view of the world.
The Indo-Europeans sought insight into the history of the world. We
can even trace a particular word for insight or knowledge from one culture
to another all over the Indo-European world. In Sanskrit it is vidya. The word
is identical to the Greek word idea, which was so important in Platos
philosophy. From Latin, we have the word video, but on Roman ground the
word simply means to see. For us, I see can mean I understand, and in the
cartoons, a light bulb can flash on above Woody Woodpeckers head when he
gets a bright idea. (Not until our own day did seeing become synonymous
with staring at the TV screen.) In English we know the words wise and
wisdomin German, wissen (to know). Norwegian has the word viten, which
has the same root as the Indian word vidya, the Greek idea, and the Latin
video.
All in all, we can establish that sight was the most important of the
senses for Indo-Europeans. The literature of Indians, Greeks, Persians, and
Teutons alike was characterized by great cosmic visions. (There is that word
again: vision comes from the Latin verb video.} It was also characteristic
for Indo-European culture to make pictures and sculptures of the gods and of
mythical events.
Lastly, the Indo-Europeans had a cyc//c view of history. This is the belief
that history goes in circles, just like the seasons of the year. There is thus no
beginning and no end to history, but there are different civilizations that rise
and fall in an eternal interplay between birth and death.
Both of the two great Oriental religions, Hinduism and Buddhism, are
Indo-European in origin. So is Greek philosophy, and we can see a number of
clear parallels between Hinduism and Buddhism on the one hand and Greek
philosophy on the other. Even today, Hinduism and Buddhism are strongly
imbued with philosophical reflection.
Not infrequently we find in Hinduism and Buddhism an emphasis on the
fact that the deity is present in all things (pantheism) and that man can
become one with God through religious insight. (Remember Plotinus,
Sophie?) To achieve this requires the practice of deep self-communion or
meditation. Therefore in the Orient, passivity and seclusion can be religious
ideals. In ancient Greece, too, there were many people who believed in an
ascetic, or religiously secluded, way of life for the salvation of the soul Many
aspects of medieval monastic life can be traced back to beliefs dating from
the Greco-Roman civilization.
Similarly, the transmigration of the soul, or the cycle of rebirth, is a
fundamental belief in many Indo-European cultures. For more than 2,500
years, the ultimate purpose of life for every Indian has been the release from
the cycle of rebirth. Plato also believed in the transmigration of the soul.
The Semites
Let us now turn to the Semites, Sophie. They belong to a completely
different culture with a completely different language. The Semites originated
in the Arabian Peninsula, but they also migrated to different parts of the world.
The Jews lived far from their home for more than 2,000 years. Semitic history
and religion reached furthest away from its roots by way of Christendom,
although Semitic culture also became widely spread via Islam.
All three Western religionsJudaism, Christianity, and Islamshare a
Semitic background. The Muslims holy scripture, the Koran, and the Old
Testament were both written in the Semitic family of languages. One of the
Old Testament words for god has the same semantic root as the Muslim
Allah. (The word allah means, quite simply, god.)
When we get to Christianity the picture becomes more complicated.
Christianity also has a Semitic background, but the New Testament was
written in Greek, and when the Christian theology or creed was formulated, it
was influenced by Greek and Latin, and thus also by Hellenistic philosophy.
The Indo-Europeans believed in many different gods. It was just as
characteristic for the Semites that from earliest times they were united in their
belief in one God. This is called monotheism. Judaism, Christianity, and Islam
all share the same fundamental idea that there is only one God.
The Semites also had in common a linear view of history. In other words,
history was seen as an ongoing line. In the beginning God created the world
and that was the beginning of history. But one day history will end and that will
be Judgment Day, when God judges the living and the dead.
The role played by history is an important feature of these three Western
religions. The belief is that God intervenes in the course of historyeven that
history exists in order that God may manifest his will in the world, just as he
once led Abraham to the Promised Land, he leads mankinds steps through
history to the Day of Judgment. When that day comes, all evil in the world will
be destroyed.
With their strong emphasis on Gods activity in the course of history, the
Semites were preoccupied with the writing of history for many thousands of
years. And these historical roots constitute the very core of their holy scriptures.
Even today the city of Jerusalem is a significant religious center for
Jews, Christians, and Muslims alike. This indicates something of the common
background of these three religions.
The city comprises prominent (Jewish) synagogues, (Christian)
churches, and (Islamic) mosques. It is therefore deeply tragic that Jerusalem
should have become a bone of contentionwith people killing each other by
the thousand because they cannot agree on who is to have ascendancy over
this Eternal City. May the UN one day succeed in making Jerusalem a holy
shrine for all three religions! (We shall not go any further into this more practical
part of our philosophy course for the moment. We will leave it entirely to
Hildes father. You must have gathered by now that he is a UN observer in
Lebanon. To be more precise, I can reveal that he is serving as a major. If you
are beginning to see some connection, thats quite as it should be. On the
other hand, lets not anticipate events!)
We said that the most important of the senses for Indo-Europeans was
sight. How important hearing was to the Semitic cultures is just as interesting.
It is no accident that the Jewish creed begins with the words: Hear, O Israel!
In the Old Testament we read how the people heard the word of the Lord,
and the Jewish prophets usually began their sermons with the words: Thus
spake Jehovah (God).
Hearing the word of God is also emphasized in Christianity. The
religious ceremonies of Christianity, Judaism, and Islam are all characterized
by reading aloud or reciting.
I also mentioned that the Indo-Europeans always made pictorial
representations or sculptures of their gods. It was just as characteristic for the
Semites that they never did. They were not supposed to create pictures or
sculptures of God or the deity. The Old Testament commands that the
people shall not make any image of God. This is still law today both for
Judaism and Islam. Within Islam there is moreover a general aversion to both
photography and art, because people should not compete with God in creating
anything.
But the Christian churches are full of pictures of Jesus and God, you are
probably thinking. True enough, Sophie, but this is just one example of how
Christendom was influenced by the Greco-Roman world. (In the Greek Orthodox
Churchthat is, in Greece and in Russia graven images, or
sculptures and crucifixes, from Bible stories are still forbidden.)
In contrast to the great religions of the Orient, the three Western
religions emphasize that there is a distance between God and his creation.
The purpose is not to be released from the cycle of rebirth, but to be
redeemed from sin and blame. Moreover, religious life is characterized more
by prayer, sermons, and the study of the scriptures than by self-communion
and meditation.
Israel
I have no intention of competing with your religion teacher, Sophie, but
let us just make a quick summary of Christianitys Jewish background.
It all began when God created the world. You can read how that
happened on the very first page of the Bible. Then mankind began to rebel
against God. Their punishment was not only that Adam and Eve were driven
from the Garden of EdenDeath also came into the world.
Mans disobedience to God is a theme that runs right through the Bible.
If we go further on in the Book of Genesis we read about the Flood and
Noahs Ark. Then we read that God made a covenant with Abraham and his
seed. This covenantor pactwas that Abraham and all his seed would
keep the Lords commandments. In exchange God promised to protect all the
children of Abraham. This covenant was renewed when Moses was given the
Ten Commandments on Mount Sinai around the year 1200 B.C. At that time
the Israelites had long been held as slaves in Egypt, but with Gods help they
were led back to the land of Israel.
About 1,000 years before Christand therefore long before there was
anything called Greek philosophywe hear of three great kings of Israel. The
first was Saul, then came David, and after him came Solomon. Now all the
Israelites were united in one kingdom, and under King David, especially, they
experienced a period of political, military, and cultural glory.
When kings were chosen, they were anointed by the people. They thus
received the title Messiah, which means the anointed one. In a religious
sense kings were looked upon as a go-between between God and his people.
The king could therefore also be called the Son of God and the country
could be called the Kingdom of God.
But before long Israel began to lose its power and the kingdom was
divided into a Northern kingdom (Israel) and a Southern kingdom (Judea). In
722 B.C. the Northern kingdom was conquered by the Assyrians and it lost all
political and religious significance. The Southern kingdom fared no better,
being conquered by the Babylonians in 586 B.C. Its temple was destroyed
and most of its people were carried off to slavery in Babylon. This Babylonian
captivity lasted until 539 B.C. when the people were permitted to return to
Jerusalem, and the great temple was restored. But for the rest of the period
before the birth of Christ the Jews continued to live under foreign domination.
The question Jews constantly asked themselves was why the Kingdom
of David was destroyed and why catastrophe after catastrophe rained down
on them, for God had promised to hold Israel in his hand. But the people had
also promised to keep Gods commandments. It gradually became widely
accepted that God was punishing Israel for her disobedience.
From around 750 B.C. various prophets began to come forward
preaching Gods wrath over Israel for not keeping his commandments. One
day God would hold a Day of Judgment over Israel, they said. We call
prophecies like these Doomsday prophecies.
In the course of time there came other prophets who preached that God
would redeem a chosen few of his people and send them a Prince of Peace
or a king of the House of David. He would restore the old Kingdom of David
and the people would have a future of prosperity.
The people that walked in darkness will see a great light, said the
prophet Isaiah, and they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon
them hath the light shined. We call prophecies like these prophecies of redemption.
To sum up: The children of Israel lived happily under King David. But
later on when their situation deteriorated, their prophets began to proclaim
that there would one day come a new king of the House of David. This
Messiah, or Son of God, would redeem the people, restore Israel to
greatness, and found a Kingdom of God.
Jesus
I assume you are still with me, Sophie? The key words are Messiah,
Son of God, and Kingdom of God. At first it was all taken politically. In the
time of Jesus, there were a lot of people who imagined that there would come
a new Messiah in the sense of a political, military, and religious leader of the
caliber of King David. This savior was thus looked upon as a national
deliverer who would put an end to the suffering of the Jews under Roman
domination.
Well and good. But there were also many people who were more
farsighted. For the past two hundred years there had been prophets who
believed that the promised Messiah would be the savior of the whole world.
He would not simply free the Israelites from a foreign yoke, he would save all
mankind from sin and blameand not least, from death. The longing for
salvation in the sense of redemption was widespread all over the Hellenistic
world.
So along comes Jesus of Nazareth. He was not the only man ever to
have come forward as the promised Messiah. Jesus also uses the words
Son of God, the Kingdom of God, and redemption. In doing this he
maintains the link with the old prophets. He rides into Jerusalem and allows
himself to be acclaimed by the crowds as the savior of the people, thus
playing directly on the way the old kings were installed in a characteristic
throne accession ritual. He also allows himself to be anointed by the people.
The time is fulfilled, he says, and the Kingdom of God is at hand.
But here is a very important point: Jesus distinguished himself from the
other messiahs by stating clearly that he was not a military or political rebel.
His mission was much greater. He preached salvation and Gods forgiveness
for everyone. To the people he met on his way he said Your sins are forgiven
you for his names sake.
Handing out the remission of sins in this way was totally unheard of.
And what was even worse, he addressed God as Father (Abba). This was
absolutely unprecedented in the Jewish community at that time. It was
therefore not long before there arose a wave of protest against him among the
scribes.
So here was the situation: a great many people at the time of Jesus
were waiting for a Messiah who would reestablish the Kingdom of God with a
great flourish of trumpets (in other words, with fire and sword). The expression
Kingdom of God was indeed a recurring theme in the preachings of Jesus
but in a much broader sense. Jesus said that the Kingdom of God is loving
thy neighbor, compassion for the weak and the poor, and forgiveness of those
who have erred.
This was a dramatic shift in the meaning of an age-old expression with
warlike overtones. People were expecting a military leader who would soon
proclaim the establishment of the Kingdom of God, and along comes Jesus in
kirtle and sandals telling them that the Kingdom of God or the new
covenantis that you must love thy neighbor as thyself. But that was not
all, Sophie, he also said that we must love our enemies. When they strike us,
we must not retaliate; we must even turn the other cheek. And we must
forgivenot seven times but seventy times seven.
Jesus himself demonstrated that he was not above talking to harlots,
corrupt usurers, and the politically subversive. But he went even further: he
said that a good-for-nothing who has squandered all his fathers inheritance
or a humble publican who has pocketed official funds is righteous before
God when he repents and prays for forgiveness, so great is Gods mercy.
But hang onhe went a step further: Jesus said that such sinners were
more righteous in the eyes of God and more deserving of Gods forgiveness
than the spotless Pharisees who went around flaunting their virtue.
Jesus pointed out that nobody can earn Gods mercy. We cannot
redeem ourselves (as many of the Greeks believed). The severe ethical
demands made by Jesus in the Sermon on the Mount were not only to teach
what the will of God meant, but also to show that no man is righteous in the
eyes of God. Gods mercy is boundless, but we have to turn to God and pray
for his forgiveness.
I shall leave a more thorough study of Jesus and his teachings to your
religion teacher. He will have quite a task. I hope he will succeed in showing
what an exceptional man Jesus was. In an ingenious way he used the
language of his time to give the old war cries a totally new and broader
content. Its not surprising that he ended on the Cross. His radical tidings of
redemption were at odds with so many interests and power factors that he
had to be removed.
When we talked about Socrates, we saw how dangerous it could be to
appeal to peoples reason. With Jesus we see how dangerous it can be to
demand unconditional brotherly love and unconditional forgiveness. Even in
the world of today we can see how mighty powers can come apart at the
seams when confronted with simple demands for peace, love, food for the
poor, and amnesty for the enemies of the state.
You may recall how incensed Plato was that the most righteous man in
Athens had to forfeit his life. According to Christian teachings, Jesus was the
only righteous person who ever lived. Nevertheless he was condemned to
death. Christians say he died for the sake of humanity. This is what Christians
usually call the Passion of Christ Jesus was the suffering servant who bore
the sins of humanity in order that we could be atoned and saved from Gods
wrath.
Paul
A few days after Jesus had been crucified and buried, rumors spread
that he had risen from the grave. He thereby proved that he was no ordinary
man. He truly was the Son of God.
We could say that the Christian Church was founded on Easter Morning
with the rumors of the resurrection of Jesus. This is already established by
Paul: And if Christ be not risen, then is our preaching vain and your faith is
also vain.
Now all mankind could hope for the resurrection of the body, for it was to
save us that Jesus was crucified. But, dear Sophie, remember that from a
Jewish point of view there was no question of the immortality of the soul or
any form of transmigration; that was a Greekand therefore an Indo-
Europeanthought. According to Christianity there is nothing in manno
soul, for example that is in itself immortal. Although the Christian Church
believes in the resurrection of the body and eternal life, it is by Gods miracle
that we are saved from death and damnation. It is neither through our own
merit nor through any