
FREAKONOMICS
A Rogue Economist
Explores the Hidden
Side of Everything
Revised and Expanded Edition
Steven D. Levitt
and
Stephen J. Dubner

CONTENTS
AN EXPLANATORY NOTE vii
In which the origins of this book are clarified.
PREFACE TO THE REVISED AND EXPANDED EDITION xi
INTRODUCTION: The Hidden Side of Everything 1
In which the books central idea is set forth: namely, if morality represents
how people would like the world to work, then economics shows
how it actually does work.
Why the conventional wisdom is so often wrong . . . How experts
from criminologists to real-estate agents to political scientistsbend the
facts . . . Why knowing what to measure, and how to measure it, is the key
to understanding modern life . . . What is freakonomics, anyway?
1. What Do Schoolteachers and Sumo Wrestlers Have
in Common? 15
In which we explore the beauty of incentives, as well as their dark
sidecheating.
Co n t e n t s
Who cheats? Just about everyone . . . How cheaters cheat, and how to
catch them . . . Stories from an Israeli day-care center . . . The sudden disappearance
of seven million American children . . . Cheating schoolteachers
in Chicago . . . Why cheating to lose is worse than cheating to win . . .
Could sumo wrestling, the national sport of Japan, be corrupt? . . . What
the Bagel Man saw: mankind may be more honest than we think.
2. How Is the Ku Klux Klan Like a Group
of Real-Estate Agents? 49
In which it is argued that nothing is more powerful than information,
especially when its power is abused.
Spilling the Ku Klux Klans secrets . . . Why experts of every kind are in
the perfect position to exploit you . . . The antidote to information abuse:
the Internet . . . Why a new car is suddenly worth so much less the moment
it leaves the lot . . . Breaking the real-estate agent code: what well maintained
really means . . . Is Trent Lott more racist than the average Weakest
Link contestant? . . . What do online daters lie about?
3. Why Do Drug Dealers Still Live with Their Moms? 79
In which the conventional wisdom is often found to be a web of fabrication,
self-interest, and convenience.
Why experts routinely make up statistics; the invention of chronic halitosis
. . . How to ask a good question . . . Sudhir Venkateshs long, strange
trip into the crack den . . . Life is a tournament . . . Why prostitutes earn
more than architects . . . What a drug dealer, a high-school quarterback,
and an editorial assistant have in common . . . How the invention of crack
cocaine mirrored the invention of nylon stockings . . . Was crack the worst
thing to hit black Americans since Jim Crow?
4. Where Have All the Criminals Gone? 105
In which the facts of crime are sorted out from the fictions.
What Nicolae Ceausescu learnedthe hard wayabout abortion . . .
i v
Co n t e n t s
Why the 1960s was a great time to be a criminal . . . Think the roaring
1990s economy put a crimp on crime? Think again . . . Why capital punishment
doesnt deter criminals . . . Do police actually lower crime rates?
. . . Prisons, prisons everywhere . . . Seeing through the New York City police
miracle . . . What is a gun, really? . . . Why early crack dealers were
like Microsoft millionaires and later crack dealers were like Pets.com . . .
The superpredator versus the senior citizen . . . Jane Roe, crime stopper:
how the legalization of abortion changed everything.
5. What Makes a Perfect Parent? 133
In which we ask, from a variety of angles, a pressing question: do parents
really matter?
The conversion of parenting from an art to a science . . . Why parenting
experts like to scare parents to death . . . Which is more dangerous: a gun or
a swimming pool? . . . The economics of fear . . . Obsessive parents and the
nature-nurture quagmire . . . Why a good school isnt as good as you might
think . . . The black-white test gap and acting white . . . Eight things
that make a child do better in school and eight that dont.
6. Perfect Parenting, Part II; or: Would a
Roshanda by Any Other Name Smell as Sweet? 163
In which we weigh the importance of a parents first official actnaming
the baby.
A boy named Winner and his brother, Loser . . . The blackest names
and the whitest names . . . The segregation of culture: why Seinfeld never
made the top fifty among black viewers . . . If you have a really bad name,
should you just change it? . . . High-end names and low-end names (and
how one becomes the other) . . . Britney Spears: a symptom, not a cause . . .
Is Aviva the next Madison? . . . What your parents were telling the world
when they gave you your name.
v
Co n t e n t s
EPILOGUE: Two Paths to Harvard 189
In which the dependability of data meets the randomness of life.
Bonus Material Added to the Revised and Expanded
2006 Edition 193
Credits
Cover
Copyright
About the Publisher
Notes 285
Acknowledgments 309
Index 311
v i
About the Authors
AN EXPLANATORY NOTE
In the summer of 2003, the New York Times Magazine sent Stephen J.
Dubner, an author and journalist, to write a profile of Steven D.
Levitt, a heralded young economist at the University of Chicago.
Dubner, who was researching a book about the psychology of
money, had lately been interviewing many economists and found that
they often spoke English as if it were a fourth or fifth language. Levitt,
who had just won the John Bates Clark Medal (a sort of junior Nobel
Prize for young economists), had lately been interviewed by many
journalists and found that their thinking wasnt very . . . robust, as an
economist might say.
But Levitt decided that Dubner wasnt a complete idiot. And Dubner
found that Levitt wasnt a human slide rule. The writer was dazzled
by the inventiveness of the economists work and his knack for
explaining it. Despite Levitts elite credentials (Harvard undergrad, a
PhD from MIT, a stack of awards), he approached economics in a notably
unorthodox way. He seemed to look at the world not so much as
An E x p l a n a to r y No te
an academic but as a very smart and curious explorera documentary
filmmaker, perhaps, or a forensic investigator or a bookie whose
markets ranged from sports to crime to pop culture. He professed little
interest in the sort of monetary issues that come to mind when
most people think about economics; he practically blustered with
self-effacement. I just dont know very much about the field of economics,
he told Dubner at one point, swiping the hair from his eyes.
Im not good at math, I dont know a lot of econometrics, and I also
dont know how to do theory. If you ask me about whether the stock
markets going to go up or down, if you ask me whether the economys
going to grow or shrink, if you ask me whether deflations good or
bad, if you ask me about taxesI mean, it would be total fakery if I
said I knew anything about any of those things.
What interested Levitt were the riddles of everyday life. His investigations
were a feast for anyone wanting to know how the world really
works. His singular attitude was evoked in Dubners resulting
article:
As Levitt sees it, economics is a science with excellent tools for gaining
answers but a serious shortage of interesting questions. His particular
gift is the ability to ask such questions. For instance: If drug
dealers make so much money, why do they still live with their
mothers? Which is more dangerous, a gun or a swimming pool?
What really caused crime rates to plunge during the past decade?
Do real-estate agents have their clients best interests at heart? Why
do black parents give their children names that may hurt their career
prospects? Do schoolteachers cheat to meet high-stakes testing
standards? Is sumo wrestling corrupt?
Many peopleincluding a fair number of his peersmight
not recognize Levitts work as economics at all. But he has merely
distilled the so-called dismal science to its most primal aim: explaining
how people get what they want. Unlike most academics,
viii
An E x p l a n a to r y No te
he is unafraid of using personal observations and curiosities; he is
also unafraid of anecdote and storytelling (although he is afraid of
calculus). He is an intuitionist. He sifts through a pile of data to
find a story that no one else has found. He figures a way to measure
an effect that veteran economists had declared unmeasurable. His
abiding intereststhough he says he has never trafficked in them
himselfare cheating, corruption, and crime.
Levitts blazing curiosity also proved attractive to thousands of
New York Times readers. He was beset by questions and queries, riddles
and requestsfrom General Motors and the New York Yankees
and U.S. senators but also from prisoners and parents and a man who
for twenty years had kept precise data on his sales of bagels. A former
Tour de France champion called Levitt to ask his help in proving that
the current Tour is rife with doping; the Central Intelligence Agency
wanted to know how Levitt might use data to catch money launderers
and terrorists.
What they were all responding to was the force of Levitts underlying
belief: that the modern world, despite a surfeit of obfuscation,
complication, and downright deceit, is not impenetrable, is not unknowable,
andif the right questions are askedis even more intriguing
than we think. All it takes is a new way of looking.
In New York City, the publishers were telling Levitt he should
write a book.
Write a book? he said. I dont want to write a book. He already
had a million more riddles to solve than time to solve them. Nor
did he think himself much of a writer. So he said that no, he wasnt
interestedunless, he proposed, maybe Dubner and I could do it
together.
Collaboration isnt for everyone. But the two of themhenceforth
known as the two of usdecided to talk things over to see if such a
book might work. We decided it could. We hope you agree.
i x

PREFACE
TO THE REVISED AND
EXPANDED EDITION
As we were writing Freakonomics, we had grave doubts that anyone
would actually read itand we certainly never envisioned the need
for this revised and expanded edition. But we are very happy, and
grateful, to have been wrong.
So why bother with a revised edition?
There are a few reasons. The first is that the world is a living,
breathing, changing thing, whereas a book is not. Once a manuscript
is finished, it sits, dead in the water, for nearly a year until it is made
ready by the publisher for its debut. This doesnt pose much of a problem
if you have written, say, a history of the Third Punic War. But because
Freakonomics explores all sorts of modern real-world issues, and
because the modern world tends to change quite fast, we have gone
through the book and made a number of minor updates.
Also, we made some mistakes. It was usually a reader who would
bring a mistake to our attention, and we very much appreciate this
input. Again, most of these changes are quite minor.
Pre fa ce to t h e Rev i s e d a n d E x p a n d e d Ed i t i o n
The most aggressively revised section of the book is the beginning
of chapter 2, which tells the story of one mans crusade against the Ku
Klux Klan. Several months after Freakonomics was first published, it
was brought to our attention that this mans portrayal of his crusade,
and of various other Klan matters, was considerably overstated. (For a
fuller explanation, see an essay called Hoodwinked? on page 231.)
As unpleasant as it was to acknowledge this error, and to diminish the
reputation of a man beloved in many quarters, we felt it was important
to set straight the historical record.
We have also futzed a bit with the architecture of the book. In the
original version, each chapter was preceded by an excerpt from the
New York Times Magazine profile that one of us (Dubner) wrote about
the other (Levitt), and which led to our collaboration on this book.
Because some readers found these excerpts intrusive (and/or egomaniacal,
and/or sycophantic), we have removed them, instead reprinting
the complete Times profile in the back of this edition in the
section called Bonus Material (page 193). There, it can be easily
skipped over if one so chooses, or read in isolation.
The further bonus material is what accounts for our having
called this edition expanded in addition to revised. Soon after the
original publication of Freakonomics, in April 2005, we began writing
a monthly column for the New York Times Magazine. We have included
in this edition several of these columns, on subjects ranging
from voting behavior to dog poop to the economics of sexual preference.
We have also included a variety of writings from our blog
(www.freakonomics.com/blog/)which, like this revised edition,
was not planned. In the beginning, we built a website merely to perform
archival and trafficking functions. We blogged reluctantly, tentatively,
infrequently. But as the months went on, and as we
discovered an audience of people who had read Freakonomics and
x i i
Pre fa ce to t h e Rev i s e d a n d E x p a n d e d Ed i t i o n
were eager to bat its ideas back and forth, we took to it more enthusiastically.
A blog, as it turns out, is an authors perfect antidote for that sickening
feeling of being dead in the water once a manuscript has been
completed. Particularly for a book like this one, a book of ideas, there
is nothing more intoxicating than to be able to extend those ideas, to
continue to refine and challenge and wrestle with them, even as the
world marches on.
x i i i

INTRODUCTION:
The Hidden Side of
Everything
Anyone living in the United States in the early 1990s and paying even
a whisper of attention to the nightly news or a daily paper could be
forgiven for having been scared out of his skin.
The culprit was crime. It had been rising relentlesslya graph
plotting the crime rate in any American city over recent decades
looked like a ski slope in profileand it seemed now to herald the
end of the world as we knew it. Death by gunfire, intentional and otherwise,
had become commonplace. So too had carjacking and crack
dealing, robbery and rape. Violent crime was a gruesome, constant
companion. And things were about to get even worse. Much worse.
All the experts were saying so.
The cause was the so-called superpredator. For a time, he was
everywhere. Glowering from the cover of newsweeklies. Swaggering
his way through foot-thick government reports. He was a scrawny,
big-city teenager with a cheap gun in his hand and nothing in his
heart but ruthlessness. There were thousands out there just like him,
FREAKONOMICS
we were told, a generation of killers about to hurl the country into
deepest chaos.
In 1995 the criminologist James Alan Fox wrote a report for the
U.S. attorney general that grimly detailed the coming spike in murders
by teenagers. Fox proposed optimistic and pessimistic scenarios.
In the optimistic scenario, he believed, the rate of teen homicides
would rise another 15 percent over the next decade; in the pessimistic
scenario, it would more than double. The next crime wave will get so
bad, he said, that it will make 1995 look like the good old days.
Other criminologists, political scientists, and similarly learned
forecasters laid out the same horrible future, as did President Clinton.
We know weve got about six years to turn this juvenile crime thing
around, Clinton said, or our country is going to be living with
chaos. And my successors will not be giving speeches about the wonderful
opportunities of the global economy; theyll be trying to keep
body and soul together for people on the streets of these cities. The
smart money was plainly on the criminals.
And then, instead of going up and up and up, crime began to fall.
And fall and fall and fall some more. The crime drop was startling in
several respects. It was ubiquitous, with every category of crime falling
in every part of the country. It was persistent, with incremental decreases
year after year. And it was entirely unanticipatedespecially
by the very experts who had been predicting the opposite.
The magnitude of the reversal was astounding. The teenage murder
rate, instead of rising 100 percent or even 15 percent as James
Alan Fox had warned, fell more than 50 percent within five years. By
2000 the overall murder rate in the United States had dropped to its
lowest level in thirty-five years. So had the rate of just about every
other sort of crime, from assault to car theft.
Even though the experts had failed to anticipate the crime drop
which was in fact well under way even as they made their horrifying
2
I n t ro d u c t i o n : Th e Hi d d e n S i d e of Eve r y t h i n g
predictionsthey now hurried to explain it. Most of their theories
sounded perfectly logical. It was the roaring 1990s economy, they
said, that helped turn back crime. It was the proliferation of gun control
laws, they said. It was the sort of innovative policing strategies put
into place in New York City, where murders would fall from 2,262 in
1990 to 540 in 2005.
These theories were not only logical; they were also encouraging,
for they attributed the crime drop to specific and recent human
initiatives. If it was gun control and clever police strategies and betterpaying
jobs that quelled crimewell then, the power to stop criminals
had been within our reach all along. As it would be the next time,
God forbid, that crime got so bad.
These theories made their way, seemingly without friction, from
the experts mouths to journalists ears to the publics mind. In short
course, they became conventional wisdom.
There was only one problem: they werent true.
There was another factor, meanwhile, that had greatly contributed
to the massive crime drop of the 1990s. It had taken shape more than
twenty years earlier and concerned a young woman in Dallas named
Norma McCorvey.
Like the proverbial butterfly that flaps its wings on one continent
and eventually causes a hurricane on another, Norma McCorvey dramatically
altered the course of events without intending to. All she
had wanted was an abortion. She was a poor, uneducated, unskilled,
alcoholic, drug-using twenty-one-year-old woman who had already
given up two children for adoption and now, in 1970, found herself
pregnant again. But in Texas, as in all but a few states at that time,
abortion was illegal. McCorveys cause came to be adopted by people
far more powerful than she. They made her the lead plaintiff in a
class-action lawsuit seeking to legalize abortion. The defendant was
Henry Wade, the Dallas County district attorney. The case ultimately
3
FREAKONOMICS
made it to the U.S. Supreme Court, by which time McCorveys name
had been disguised as Jane Roe. On January 22, 1973, the court ruled
in favor of Ms. Roe, allowing legalized abortion throughout the
United States. By this time, of course, it was far too late for Ms.
McCorvey/Roe to have her abortion. She had given birth and put the
child up for adoption. (Years later she would renounce her allegiance
to legalized abortion and become a pro-life activist.)
So how did Roe v. Wade help trigger, a generation later, the greatest
crime drop in recorded history?
As far as crime is concerned, it turns out that not all children are
born equal. Not even close. Decades of studies have shown that a
child born into an adverse family environment is far more likely than
other children to become a criminal. And the millions of women
most likely to have an abortion in the wake of Roe v. Wadepoor, unmarried,
and teenage mothers for whom illegal abortions had been
too expensive or too hard to getwere often models of adversity.
They were the very women whose children, if born, would have been
much more likely than average to become criminals. But because of
Roe v. Wade, these children werent being born. This powerful cause
would have a drastic, distant effect: years later, just as these unborn
children would have entered their criminal primes, the rate of crime
began to plummet.
It wasnt gun control or a strong economy or new police strategies
that finally blunted the American crime wave. It was, among other
factors, the reality that the pool of potential criminals had dramatically
shrunk.
Now, as the crime-drop experts (the former crime doomsayers)
spun their theories to the media, how many times did they cite legalized
abortion as a cause?
Zero.
4
I n t ro d u c t i o n : Th e Hi d d e n S i d e of Eve r y t h i n g
It is the quintessential blend of commerce and camaraderie: you hire
a real-estate agent to sell your home.
She sizes up its charms, snaps some pictures, sets the price, writes a
seductive ad, shows the house aggressively, negotiates the offers, and
sees the deal through to its end. Sure, its a lot of work, but shes getting
a nice cut. On the sale of a $300,000 house, a typical 6 percent
agent fee yields $18,000. Eighteen thousand dollars, you say to yourself:
thats a lot of money. But you also tell yourself that you never
could have sold the house for $300,000 on your own. The agent knew
how towhats that phrase she used?maximize the houses value.
She got you top dollar, right?
Right?
A real-estate agent is a different breed of expert than a criminologist,
but she is every bit the expert. That is, she knows her field far better
than the layman on whose behalf she is acting. She is better
informed about the houses value, the state of the housing market,
even the buyers frame of mind. You depend on her for this information.
That, in fact, is why you hired an expert.
As the world has grown more specialized, countless such experts
have made themselves similarly indispensable. Doctors, lawyers, contractors,
stockbrokers, auto mechanics, mortgage brokers, financial
planners: they all enjoy a gigantic informational advantage. And they
use that advantage to help you, the person who hired them, get exactly
what you want for the best price.
Right?
It would be lovely to think so. But experts are human, and humans
respond to incentives. How any given expert treats you, therefore, will
depend on how that experts incentives are set up. Sometimes his incentives
may work in your favor. For instance: a study of California
auto mechanics found they often passed up a small repair bill by
letting failing cars pass emissions inspectionsthe reason being that
5
FREAKONOMICS
lenient mechanics are rewarded with repeat business. But in a different
case, an experts incentives may work against you. In a medical
study, it turned out that obstetricians in areas with declining birth
rates are much more likely to perform cesarean-section deliveries than
obstetricians in growing areassuggesting that, when business is
tough, doctors try to ring up more expensive procedures.
It is one thing to muse about experts abusing their position and
another to prove it. The best way to do so would be to measure how
an expert treats you versus how he performs the same service for himself.
Unfortunately a surgeon doesnt operate on himself. Nor is his
medical file a matter of public record; neither is an auto mechanics repair
log for his own car.
Real-estate sales, however, are a matter of public record. And realestate
agents often do sell their own homes. A recent set of data covering
the sale of nearly 100,000 houses in suburban Chicago shows that
more than 3,000 of those houses were owned by the agents themselves.
Before plunging into the data, it helps to ask a question: what is
the real-estate agents incentive when she is selling her own home?
Simple: to make the best deal possible. Presumably this is also your incentive
when you are selling your home. And so your incentive and
the real-estate agents incentive would seem to be nicely aligned. Her
commission, after all, is based on the sale price.
But as incentives go, commissions are tricky. First of all, a 6 percent
real-estate commission is typically split between the sellers agent
and the buyers. Each agent then kicks back roughly half of her take to
the agency. Which means that only 1.5 percent of the purchase price
goes directly into your agents pocket.
So on the sale of your $300,000 house, her personal take of the
$18,000 commission is $4,500. Still not bad, you say. But what if the
house was actually worth more than $300,000? What if, with a little
6
I n t ro d u c t i o n : Th e Hi d d e n S i d e of Eve r y t h i n g
more effort and patience and a few more newspaper ads, she could
have sold it for $310,000? After the commission, that puts an additional
$9,400 in your pocket. But the agents additional shareher
personal 1.5 percent of the extra $10,000is a mere $150. If you
earn $9,400 while she earns only $150, maybe your incentives arent
aligned after all. (Especially when shes the one paying for the ads and
doing all the work.) Is the agent willing to put out all that extra time,
money, and energy for just $150?
Theres one way to find out: measure the difference between the
sales data for houses that belong to real-estate agents themselves and
the houses they sold on behalf of clients. Using the data from the sales
of those 100,000 Chicago homes, and controlling for any number of
variableslocation, age and quality of the house, aesthetics, whether
or not the property was an investment, and so onit turns out that a
real-estate agent keeps her own home on the market an average of ten
days longer and sells it for an extra 3-plus percent, or $10,000 on a
$300,000 house. When she sells her own house, an agent holds out
for the best offer; when she sells yours, she encourages you to take the
first decent offer that comes along. Like a stockbroker churning commissions,
she wants to make deals and make them fast. Why not? Her
share of a better offer$150is too puny an incentive to encourage
her to do otherwise.
Of all the truisms about politics, one is held to be truer than the rest:
money buys elections. Arnold Schwarzenegger, Michael Bloomberg,
Jon Corzinethese are but a few recent, dramatic examples of the
truism at work. (Disregard for a moment the contrary examples of
Steve Forbes, Michael Huffington, and especially Thomas Golisano,
who over the course of three gubernatorial elections in New York
spent $93 million of his own money and won 4 percent, 8 percent,
7
FREAKONOMICS
and 14 percent, respectively, of the vote.) Most people would agree
that money has an undue influence on elections and that far too
much money is spent on political campaigns.
Indeed, election data show it is true that the candidate who spends
more money in a campaign usually wins. But is money the cause of the
victory?
It might seem logical to think so, much as it might have seemed
logical that a booming 1990s economy helped reduce crime. But just
because two things are correlated does not mean that one causes the
other. A correlation simply means that a relationship exists between
two factorslets call them X and Ybut it tells you nothing about
the direction of that relationship. Its possible that X causes Y; its also
possible that Y causes X; and it may be that X and Y are both being
caused by some other factor, Z.
Think about this correlation: cities with a lot of murders also tend
to have a lot of police officers. Consider now the police/murder correlation
in a pair of real cities. Denver and Washington, D.C., have
about the same populationbut Washington has nearly three times
as many police as Denver, and it also has eight times the number of
murders. Unless you have more information, however, its hard to say
whats causing what. Someone who didnt know better might contemplate
these figures and conclude that it is all those extra police in
Washington who are causing the extra murders. Such wayward thinking,
which has a long history, generally provokes a wayward response.
Consider the folktale of the czar who learned that the most diseaseridden
province in his empire was also the province with the most
doctors. His solution? He promptly ordered all the doctors shot dead.
Now, returning to the issue of campaign spending: in order to figure
out the relationship between money and elections, it helps to consider
the incentives at play in campaign finance. Lets say you are the
kind of person who might contribute $1,000 to a candidate. Chances
8
I n t ro d u c t i o n : Th e Hi d d e n S i d e of Eve r y t h i n g
are youll give the money in one of two situations: a close race, in
which you think the money will influence the outcome; or a campaign
in which one candidate is a sure winner and you would like to
bask in reflected glory or receive some future in-kind consideration.
The one candidate you wont contribute to is a sure loser. ( Just ask any
presidential hopeful who bombs in Iowa and New Hampshire.) So
front-runners and incumbents raise a lot more money than long
shots. And what about spending that money? Incumbents and frontrunners
obviously have more cash, but they only spend a lot of it
when they stand a legitimate chance of losing; otherwise, why dip
into a war chest that might be more useful later on, when a more formidable
opponent appears?
Now picture two candidates, one intrinsically appealing and the
other not so. The appealing candidate raises much more money and
wins easily. But was it the money that won him the votes, or was it his
appeal that won the votes and the money?
Thats a crucial question but a very hard one to answer. Voter appeal,
after all, isnt easy to quantify. How can it be measured?
It cant, reallyexcept in one special case. The key is to measure a
candidate against . . . himself. That is, Candidate A today is likely to
be similar to Candidate A two or four years hence. The same could be
said for Candidate B. If only Candidate A ran against Candidate B in
two consecutive elections but in each case spent different amounts of
money. Then, with the candidates appeal more or less constant, we
could measure the moneys impact.
As it turns out, the same two candidates run against each other in
consecutive elections all the timeindeed, in nearly a thousand U.S.
congressional races since 1972. What do the numbers have to say
about such cases?
Heres the surprise: the amount of money spent by the candidates
hardly matters at all. A winning candidate can cut his spending in half
9
FREAKONOMICS
and lose only 1 percent of the vote. Meanwhile, a losing candidate
who doubles his spending can expect to shift the vote in his favor by
only that same 1 percent. What really matters for a political candidate
is not how much you spend; what matters is who you are. (The same
could be saidand will be said, in chapter 5about parents.) Some
politicians are inherently attractive to voters and others simply arent,
and no amount of money can do much about it. (Messrs. Forbes,
Huffington, and Golisano already know this, of course.)
And what about the other half of the election truismthat the
amount of money spent on campaign finance is obscenely huge? In a
typical election period that includes campaigns for the presidency, the
Senate, and the House of Representatives, about $1 billion is spent
per yearwhich sounds like a lot of money, unless you care to measure
it against something seemingly less important than democratic
elections.
It is the same amount, for instance, that Americans spend every
year on chewing gum.
This isnt a book about the cost of chewing gum versus campaign
spending per se, or about disingenuous real-estate agents, or the impact
of legalized abortion on crime. It will certainly address these scenarios
and dozens more, from the art of parenting to the mechanics of
cheating, from the inner workings of a crack-selling gang to racial discrimination
on The Weakest Link. What this book is about is stripping
a layer or two from the surface of modern life and seeing what is happening
underneath. We will ask a lot of questions, some frivolous and
some about life-and-death issues. The answers may often seem odd
but, after the fact, also rather obvious. We will seek out these answers
in the datawhether those data come in the form of schoolchildrens
test scores or New York Citys crime statistics or a crack dealers finan-
1 0
I n t ro d u c t i o n : Th e Hi d d e n S i d e of Eve r y t h i n g
cial records. Often we will take advantage of patterns in the data that
were incidentally left behind, like an airplanes sharp contrail in a high
sky. It is well and good to opine or theorize about a subject, as humankind
is wont to do, but when moral posturing is replaced by an
honest assessment of the data, the result is often a new, surprising insight.
Morality, it could be argued, represents the way that people would
like the world to workwhereas economics represents how it actually
does work. Economics is above all a science of measurement. It comprises
an extraordinarily powerful and flexible set of tools that can reliably
assess a thicket of information to determine the effect of any
one factor, or even the whole effect. Thats what the economy is,
after all: a thicket of information about jobs and real estate and banking
and investment. But the tools of economics can be just as easily
applied to subjects that are morewell, more interesting.
This book, then, has been written from a very specific worldview,
based on a few fundamental ideas:
Incentives are the cornerstone of modern life. And understanding
themor, often, ferreting them outis the key to solving just about
any riddle, from violent crime to sports cheating to online dating.
The conventional wisdom is often wrong. Crime didnt keep soaring
in the 1990s, money alone doesnt win elections, andsurprise
drinking eight glasses of water a day has never actually been shown to
do a thing for your health. Conventional wisdom is often shoddily
formed and devilishly difficult to see through, but it can be done.
Dramatic effects often have distant, even subtle, causes. The answer to
a given riddle is not always right in front of you. Norma McCorvey
had a far greater impact on crime than did the combined forces of gun
control, a strong economy, and innovative police strategies. So did, as
we shall see, a man named Oscar Danilo Blandon, aka the Johnny
Appleseed of Crack.
1 1
FREAKONOMICS
Expertsfrom criminologists to real-estate agentsuse their informational
advantage to serve their own agenda. However, they can be
beat at their own game. And in the face of the Internet, their informational
advantage is shrinking every dayas evidenced by, among
other things, the falling price of coffins and life-insurance premiums.
Knowing what to measure and how to measure it makes a complicated
world much less so. If you learn to look at data in the right way, you can
explain riddles that otherwise might have seemed impossible. Because
there is nothing like the sheer power of numbers to scrub away layers
of confusion and contradiction.
So the aim of this book is to explore the hidden side of . . . everything.
This may occasionally be a frustrating exercise. It may sometimes
feel as if we are peering at the world through a straw or even
staring into a funhouse mirror; but the idea is to look at many different
scenarios and examine them in a way they have rarely been examined.
In some regards, this is a strange concept for a book. Most books
put forth a single theme, crisply expressed in a sentence or two, and
then tell the entire story of that theme: the history of salt; the fragility
of democracy; the use and misuse of punctuation. This book has no
such unifying theme. We did consider, for about six minutes, writing
a book that would revolve around a single themethe theory and
practice of applied microeconomics, anyone?but opted instead for
a sort of treasure-hunt approach. Yes, this approach employs the best
analytical tools that economics can offer, but it also allows us to follow
whatever freakish curiosities may occur to us. Thus our invented field
of study: Freakonomics. The sort of stories told in this book are not
often covered in Econ 101, but that may change. Since the science of
economics is primarily a set of tools, as opposed to a subject matter,
then no subject, however offbeat, need be beyond its reach.
It is worth remembering that Adam Smith, the founder of classical
economics, was first and foremost a philosopher. He strove to be a
1 2
I n t ro d u c t i o n : Th e Hi d d e n S i d e of Eve r y t h i n g
moralist and, in doing so, became an economist. When he published
The Theory of Moral Sentiments in 1759, modern capitalism was just
getting under way. Smith was entranced by the sweeping changes
wrought by this new force, but it wasnt just the numbers that interested
him. It was the human effect, the fact that economic forces were
vastly changing the way a person thought and behaved in a given situation.
What might lead one person to cheat or steal while another
didnt? How would one persons seemingly innocuous choice, good or
bad, affect a great number of people down the line? In Smiths era,
cause and effect had begun to wildly accelerate; incentives were magnified
tenfold. The gravity and shock of these changes were as overwhelming
to the citizens of his time as the gravity and shock of
modern life may seem to us today.
Smiths true subject was the friction between individual desire and
societal norms. The economic historian Robert Heilbroner, writing
in The Worldly Philosophers, wondered how Smith was able to separate
the doings of man, a creature of self-interest, from the greater moral
plane in which man operated. Smith held that the answer lay in our
ability to put ourselves in the position of a third person, an impartial
observer, Heilbroner wrote, and in this way to form a notion of the
objective . . . merits of a case.
Consider yourself, then, in the company of a third personor, if
you will, a pair of third peopleeager to explore the objective merits
of interesting cases. These explorations generally begin with the asking
of a simple unasked question. Such as: what do schoolteachers
and sumo wrestlers have in common?
1 3

1
What Do Schoolteachers
and Sumo Wrestlers
Have in Common?
Imagine for a moment that you are the manager of a day-care center.
You have a clearly stated policy that children are supposed to be
picked up by 4 p.m. But very often parents are late. The result: at days
end, you have some anxious children and at least one teacher who
must wait around for the parents to arrive. What to do?
A pair of economists who heard of this dilemmait turned out to
be a rather common oneoffered a solution: fine the tardy parents.
Why, after all, should the day-care center take care of these kids for
free?
The economists decided to test their solution by conducting a
study of ten day-care centers in Haifa, Israel. The study lasted twenty
weeks, but the fine was not introduced immediately. For the first
four weeks, the economists simply kept track of the number of parents
who came late; there were, on average, eight late pickups per
week per day-care center. In the fifth week, the fine was enacted. It
was announced that any parent arriving more than ten minutes late
FREAKONOMICS
would pay $3 per child for each incident. The fee would be added to
the parents monthly bill, which was roughly $380.
After the fine was enacted, the number of late pickups promptly
went . . . up. Before long there were twenty late pickups per week,
more than double the original average. The incentive had plainly
backfired.
Economics is, at root, the study of incentives: how people get what
they want, or need, especially when other people want or need the
same thing. Economists love incentives. They love to dream them up
and enact them, study them and tinker with them. The typical economist
believes the world has not yet invented a problem that he cannot
fix if given a free hand to design the proper incentive scheme. His
solution may not always be prettyit may involve coercion or exorbitant
penalties or the violation of civil libertiesbut the original
problem, rest assured, will be fixed. An incentive is a bullet, a lever, a
key: an often tiny object with astonishing power to change a situation.
We all learn to respond to incentives, negative and positive, from
the outset of life. If you toddle over to the hot stove and touch it, you
burn a finger. But if you bring home straight As from school, you get
a new bike. If you are spotted picking your nose in class, you get
ridiculed. But if you make the basketball team, you move up the social
ladder. If you break curfew, you get grounded. But if you ace your
SATs, you get to go to a good college. If you flunk out of law school,
you have to go to work at your fathers insurance company. But if you
perform so well that a rival company comes calling, you become a vice
president and no longer have to work for your father. If you become
so excited about your new vice president job that you drive home at
eighty mph, you get pulled over by the police and fined $100. But if
you hit your sales projections and collect a year-end bonus, you not
only arent worried about the $100 ticket but can also afford to buy
1 6
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
that Viking range youve always wantedand on which your toddler
can now burn her own finger.
An incentive is simply a means of urging people to do more of
a good thing and less of a bad thing. But most incentives dont
come about organically. Someonean economist or a politician or a
parenthas to invent them. Your three-year-old eats all her vegetables
for a week? She wins a trip to the toy store. A big steelmaker
belches too much smoke into the air? The company is fined for each
cubic foot of pollutants over the legal limit. Too many Americans
arent paying their share of income tax? It was the economist Milton
Friedman who helped come up with a solution to this one: automatic
tax withholding from employees paychecks.
There are three basic flavors of incentive: economic, social, and
moral. Very often a single incentive scheme will include all three varieties.
Think about the anti-smoking campaign of recent years. The
addition of a $3-per-pack sin tax is a strong economic incentive
against buying cigarettes. The banning of cigarettes in restaurants and
bars is a powerful social incentive. And when the U.S. government asserts
that terrorists raise money by selling black-market cigarettes,
that acts as a rather jarring moral incentive.
Some of the most compelling incentives yet invented have been
put in place to deter crime. Considering this fact, it might be worthwhile
to take a familiar questionwhy is there so much crime in
modern society?and stand it on its head: why isnt there a lot more
crime?
After all, every one of us regularly passes up opportunities to
maim, steal, and defraud. The chance of going to jailthereby losing
your job, your house, and your freedom, all of which are essentially
economic penaltiesis certainly a strong incentive. But when it
comes to crime, people also respond to moral incentives (they dont
want to do something they consider wrong) and social incentives
1 7
FREAK ONOMIC S
(they dont want to be seen by others as doing something wrong). For
certain types of misbehavior, social incentives are terribly powerful. In
an echo of Hester Prynnes scarlet letter, many American cities now
fight prostitution with a shaming offensive, posting pictures of convicted
johns (and prostitutes) on websites or on local-access television.
Which is a more horrifying deterrent: a $500 fine for soliciting a
prostitute or the thought of your friends and family ogling you on
www.HookersAndJohns.com?
So through a complicated, haphazard, and constantly readjusted
web of economic, social, and moral incentives, modern society does
its best to militate against crime. Some people would argue that we
dont do a very good job. But taking the long view, that is clearly not
true. Consider the historical trend in homicide (not including wars),
which is both the most reliably measured crime and the best barometer
of a societys overall crime rate. These statistics, compiled by the
criminologist Manuel Eisner, track the historical homicide levels in
five European regions.
HOMICIDES
(per 100,000 People)
NETHERLANDS GERMANY AND
ENGLAND AND BELGIUM SCANDINAVIA SWITZERLAND ITALY
13th and 14th c. 23.0 47.0 n.a. 37.0 56.0
15th c. n.a. 45.0 46.0 16.0 73.0
16th c. 7.0 25.0 21.0 11.0 47.0
17th c. 5.0 7.5 18.0 7.0 32.0
18th c. 1.5 5.5 1.9 7.5 10.5
19th c. 1.7 1.6 1.1 2.8 12.6
19001949 0.8 1.5 0.7 1.7 3.2
19501994 0.9 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.5
1 8
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
The steep decline of these numbers over the centuries suggests
that, for one of the gravest human concernsgetting murderedthe
incentives that we collectively cook up are working better and better.
So what was wrong with the incentive at the Israeli day-care centers?
You have probably already guessed that the $3 fine was simply too
small. For that price, a parent with one child could afford to be late
every day and only pay an extra $60 each monthjust one-sixth of
the base fee. As babysitting goes, thats pretty cheap. What if the fine
had been set at $100 instead of $3? That would have likely put an end
to the late pickups, though it would have also engendered plenty of ill
will. (Any incentive is inherently a trade-off; the trick is to balance the
extremes.)
But there was another problem with the day-care center fine. It
substituted an economic incentive (the $3 penalty) for a moral incentive
(the guilt that parents were supposed to feel when they came late).
For just a few dollars each day, parents could buy off their guilt. Furthermore,
the small size of the fine sent a signal to the parents that late
pickups werent such a big problem. If the day-care center suffers only
$3 worth of pain for each late pickup, why bother to cut short your
tennis game? Indeed, when the economists eliminated the $3 fine in
the seventeenth week of their study, the number of late-arriving parents
didnt change. Now they could arrive late, pay no fine, and feel no
guilt.
Such is the strange and powerful nature of incentives. A slight
tweak can produce drastic and often unforeseen results. Thomas Jefferson
noted this while reflecting on the tiny incentive that led to the
Boston Tea Party and, in turn, the American Revolution: So inscrutable
is the arrangement of causes and consequences in this world
that a two-penny duty on tea, unjustly imposed in a sequestered part
of it, changes the condition of all its inhabitants.
1 9
FREAKONOMICS
In the 1970s, researchers conducted a study that, like the Israeli
day-care study, pitted a moral incentive against an economic incentive.
In this case, they wanted to learn about the motivation behind
blood donations. Their discovery: when people are given a small
stipend for donating blood rather than simply being praised for their
altruism, they tend to donate less blood. The stipend turned a noble
act of charity into a painful way to make a few dollars, and it wasnt
worth it.
What if the blood donors had been offered an incentive of $50, or
$500, or $5,000? Surely the number of donors would have changed
dramatically.
But something else would have changed dramatically as well, for
every incentive has its dark side. If a pint of blood were suddenly
worth $5,000, you can be sure that plenty of people would take note.
They might literally steal blood at knifepoint. They might pass off pig
blood as their own. They might circumvent donation limits by using
fake IDs. Whatever the incentive, whatever the situation, dishonest
people will try to gain an advantage by whatever means necessary.
Or, as W. C. Fields once said: a thing worth having is a thing worth
cheating for.
Who cheats?
Well, just about anyone, if the stakes are right. You might say to
yourself, I dont cheat, regardless of the stakes. And then you might remember
the time you cheated on, say, a board game. Last week. Or
the golf ball you nudged out of its bad lie. Or the time you really
wanted a bagel in the office break room but couldnt come up with the
dollar you were supposed to drop in the coffee can. And then took the
bagel anyway. And told yourself youd pay double the next time. And
didnt.
For every clever person who goes to the trouble of creating an in-
20
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
centive scheme, there is an army of people, clever and otherwise, who
will inevitably spend even more time trying to beat it. Cheating
may or may not be human nature, but it is certainly a prominent feature
in just about every human endeavor. Cheating is a primordial
economic act: getting more for less. So it isnt just the boldface
namesinside-trading CEOs and pill-popping ballplayers and perkabusing
politicianswho cheat. It is the waitress who pockets her tips
instead of pooling them. It is the Wal-Mart payroll manager who goes
into the computer and shaves his employees hours to make his own
performance look better. It is the third grader who, worried about not
making it to the fourth grade, copies test answers from the kid sitting
next to him.
Some cheating leaves barely a shadow of evidence. In other cases,
the evidence is massive. Consider what happened one spring evening
at midnight in 1987: seven million American children suddenly disappeared.
The worst kidnapping wave in history? Hardly. It was the
night of April 15, and the Internal Revenue Service had just changed
a rule. Instead of merely listing the name of each dependent child, tax
filers were now required to provide a Social Security number. Suddenly,
seven million childrenchildren who had existed only as
phantom exemptions on the previous years 1040 formsvanished,
representing about one in ten of all dependent children in the United
States.
The incentive for those cheating taxpayers was quite clear. The
same for the waitress, the payroll manager, and the third grader. But
what about that third graders teacher? Might she have an incentive to
cheat? And if so, how would she do it?
Imagine now that instead of running a day-care center in Haifa,
you are running the Chicago Public Schools, a system that educates
400,000 students each year.
2 1
FREAKONOMICS
The most volatile current debate among American school administrators,
teachers, parents, and students concerns high-stakes testing.
The stakes are considered high because instead of simply testing
students to measure their progress, schools are increasingly held accountable
for the results.
The federal government mandated high-stakes testing as part of
the No Child Left Behind law, signed by President Bush in 2002. But
even before that law, most states gave annual standardized tests to students
in elementary and secondary school. Twenty states rewarded individual
schools for good test scores or dramatic improvement;
thirty-two states sanctioned the schools that didnt do well.
The Chicago Public School system embraced high-stakes testing
in 1996. Under the new policy, a school with low reading scores
would be placed on probation and face the threat of being shut down,
its staff to be dismissed or reassigned. The CPS also did away with
what is known as social promotion. In the past, only a dramatically
inept or difficult student was held back a grade. Now, in order to be
promoted, every student in third, sixth, and eighth grade had to manage
a minimum score on the standardized, multiple-choice exam
known as the Iowa Test of Basic Skills.
Advocates of high-stakes testing argue that it raises the standards
of learning and gives students more incentive to study. Also, if the test
prevents poor students from advancing without merit, they wont clog
up the higher grades and slow down good students. Opponents,
meanwhile, worry that certain students will be unfairly penalized if
they dont happen to test well, and that teachers may concentrate on
the test topics at the exclusion of more important lessons.
Schoolchildren, of course, have had incentive to cheat for as long
as there have been tests. But high-stakes testing has so radically
changed the incentives for teachers that they too now have added reason
to cheat. With high-stakes testing, a teacher whose students test
22
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
poorly can be censured or passed over for a raise or promotion. If the
entire school does poorly, federal funding can be withheld; if the
school is put on probation, the teacher stands to be fired. High-stakes
testing also presents teachers with some positive incentives. If her students
do well enough, she might find herself praised, promoted, and
even richer: the state of California at one point introduced bonuses of
$25,000 for teachers who produced big test-score gains.
And if a teacher were to survey this newly incentivized landscape
and consider somehow inflating her students scores, she just might
be persuaded by one final incentive: teacher cheating is rarely looked
for, hardly ever detected, and just about never punished.
How might a teacher go about cheating? There are any number of
possibilities, from brazen to subtle. A fifth-grade student in Oakland
recently came home from school and gaily told her mother that her
super-nice teacher had written the answers to the state exam right
there on the chalkboard. Such instances are certainly rare, for placing
your fate in the hands of thirty prepubescent witnesses doesnt seem
like a risk that even the worst teacher would take. (The Oakland
teacher was duly fired.) There are more nuanced ways to inflate students
scores. A teacher can simply give students extra time to complete
the test. If she obtains a copy of the exam earlythat is,
illegitimatelyshe can prepare them for specific questions. More
broadly, she can teach to the test, basing her lesson plans on questions
from past years exams, which isnt considered cheating but may
well violate the spirit of the test. Since these tests all have multiplechoice
answers, with no penalty for wrong guesses, a teacher might instruct
her students to randomly fill in every blank as the clock is
winding down, perhaps inserting a long string of Bs or an alternating
pattern of Bs and Cs. She might even fill in the blanks for them after
theyve left the room.
But if a teacher really wanted to cheatand make it worth her
23
FREAKONOMICS
whileshe might collect her students answer sheets and, in the hour
or so before turning them in to be read by an electronic scanner, erase
the wrong answers and fill in correct ones. (And you always thought
that no. 2 pencil was for the children to change their answers.) If this
kind of teacher cheating is truly going on, how might it be detected?
To catch a cheater, it helps to think like one. If you were willing to
erase your students wrong answers and fill in correct ones, you probably
wouldnt want to change too many wrong answers. That would
clearly be a tip-off. You probably wouldnt even want to change answers
on every students testanother tip-off. Nor, in all likelihood,
would you have enough time, because the answer sheets have to be
turned in soon after the test is over. So what you might do is select a
string of eight or ten consecutive questions and fill in the correct answers
for, say, one-half or two-thirds of your students. You could easily
memorize a short pattern of correct answers, and it would be a lot
faster to erase and change that pattern than to go through each
students answer sheet individually. You might even think to focus
your activity toward the end of the test, where the questions tend to
be harder than the earlier questions. In that way, youd be most likely
to substitute correct answers for wrong ones.
If economics is a science primarily concerned with incentives, it is
alsofortunatelya science with statistical tools to measure how
people respond to those incentives. All you need are some data.
In this case, the Chicago Public School system obliged. It made
available a database of the test answers for every CPS student from
third grade through seventh grade from 1993 to 2000. This amounts
to roughly 30,000 students per grade per year, more than 700,000
sets of test answers, and nearly 100 million individual answers. The
data, organized by classroom, included each students question-byquestion
answer strings for reading and math tests. (The actual paper
answer sheets were not included; they were habitually shredded soon
24
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
after a test.) The data also included some information about each
teacher and demographic information for every student, as well as his
or her past and future test scoreswhich would prove a key element
in detecting the teacher cheating.
Now it was time to construct an algorithm that could tease some
conclusions from this mass of data. What might a cheating teachers
classroom look like?
The first thing to search for would be unusual answer patterns in a
given classroom: blocks of identical answers, for instance, especially
among the harder questions. If ten very bright students (as indicated
by past and future test scores) gave correct answers to the exams first
five questions (typically the easiest ones), such an identical block
shouldnt be considered suspicious. But if ten poor students gave correct
answers to the last five questions on the exam (the hardest ones),
thats worth looking into. Another red flag would be a strange pattern
within any one students examsuch as getting the hard questions
right while missing the easy onesespecially when measured against
the thousands of students in other classrooms who scored similarly on
the same test. Furthermore, the algorithm would seek out a classroom
full of students who performed far better than their past scores would
have predicted and who then went on to score significantly lower the
following year. A dramatic one-year spike in test scores might initially
be attributed to a good teacher; but with a dramatic fall to follow,
theres a strong likelihood that the spike was brought about by artificial
means.
Consider now the answer strings from the students in two sixthgrade
Chicago classrooms who took the identical math test. Each horizontal
row represents one students answers. The letter a, b, c, or d
indicates a correct answer; a number indicates a wrong answer, with 1
corresponding to a, 2 corresponding to b, and so on. A zero represents
an answer that was left blank. One of these classrooms almost cer-
25
FREAK ONOMIC S
tainly had a cheating teacher and the other did not. Try to tell the difference
although be forewarned that its not easy with the naked eye.
Classroom A
112a4a342cb214d0001acd24a3a12dadbcb4a0000000
d4a2341cacbddad3142a2344a2ac23421c00adb4b3cb
1b2a34d4ac42d23b141acd24a3a12dadbcb4a2134141
dbaab3dcacb1dadbc42ac2cc31012dadbcb4adb40000
d12443d43232d32323c213c22d2c23234c332db4b300
db2abad1acbdda212b1acd24a3a12dadbcb400000000
d4aab2124cbddadbcb1a42cca3412dadbcb423134bc1
1b33b4d4a2b1dadbc3ca22c000000000000000000000
d43a3a24acb1d32b412acd24a3a12dadbcb422143bc0
313a3ad1ac3d2a23431223c000012dadbcb400000000
db2a33dcacbd32d313c21142323cc300000000000000
d43ab4d1ac3dd43421240d24a3a12dadbcb400000000
db223a24acb11a3b24cacd12a241cdadbcb4adb4b300
db4abadcacb1dad3141ac212a3a1c3a144ba2db41b43
1142340c2cbddadb4b1acd24a3a12dadbcb43d133bc4
214ab4dc4cbdd31b1b2213c4ad412dadbcb4adb00000
1423b4d4a23d24131413234123a243a2413a21441343
3b3ab4d14c3d2ad4cbcac1c003a12dadbcb4adb40000
dba2ba21ac3d2ad3c4c4cd40a3a12dadbcb400000000
d122ba2cacbd1a13211a2d02a2412d0dbcb4adb4b3c0
144a3adc4cbddadbcbc2c2cc43a12dadbcb4211ab343
d43aba3cacbddadbcbca42c2a3212dadbcb42344b3cb
Classroom B
db3a431422bd131b4413cd422a1acda332342d3ab4c4
d1aa1a11acb2d3dbc1ca22c23242c3a142b3adb243c1
26
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
d42a12d2a4b1d32b21ca2312a3411d00000000000000
3b2a34344c32d21b1123cdc000000000000000000000
34aabad12cbdd3d4c1ca112cad2ccd00000000000000
d33a3431a2b2d2d44b2acd2cad2c2223b40000000000
23aa32d2a1bd2431141342c13d212d233c34a3b3b000
d32234d4a1bdd23b242a22c2a1a1cda2b1baa33a0000
d3aab23c4cbddadb23c322c2a222223232b443b24bc3
d13a14313c31d42b14c421c42332cd2242b3433a3343
d13a3ad122b1da2b11242dc1a3a12100000000000000
d12a3ad1a13d23d3cb2a21ccada24d2131b440000000
314a133c4cbd142141ca424cad34c122413223ba4b40
d42a3adcacbddadbc42ac2c2ada2cda341baa3b24321
db1134dc2cb2dadb24c412c1ada2c3a341ba20000000
d1341431acbddad3c4c213412da22d3d1132a1344b1b
1ba41a21a1b2dadb24ca22c1ada2cd32413200000000
dbaa33d2a2bddadbcbca11c2a2accda1b2ba20000000
If you guessed that classroom A was the cheating classroom, congratulations.
Here again are the answer strings from classroom A, now
reordered by a computer that has been asked to apply the cheating algorithm
and seek out suspicious patterns.
Classroom A
(With cheating algorithm applied)
1. 112a4a342cb214d0001acd24a3a12dadbcb4a0000000
2. 1b2a34d4ac42d23b141acd24a3a12dadbcb4a2134141
3. db2abad1acbdda212b1acd24a3a12dadbcb400000000
4. d43a3a24acb1d32b412acd24a3a12dadbcb422143bc0
5. 1142340c2cbddadb4b1acd24a3a12dadbcb43d133bc4
6. d43ab4d1ac3dd43421240d24a3a12dadbcb400000000
7. dba2ba21ac3d2ad3c4c4cd40a3a12dadbcb400000000
27
FREAKONOMICS
8. 144a3adc4cbddadbcbc2c2cc43a12dadbcb4211ab343
9. 3b3ab4d14c3d2ad4cbcac1c003a12dadbcb4adb40000
10. d43aba3cacbddadbcbca42c2a3212dadbcb42344b3cb
11. 214ab4dc4cbdd31b1b2213c4ad412dadbcb4adb00000
12. 313a3ad1ac3d2a23431223c000012dadbcb400000000
13. d4aab2124cbddadbcb1a42cca3412dadbcb423134bc1
14. dbaab3dcacb1dadbc42ac2cc31012dadbcb4adb40000
15. db223a24acb11a3b24cacd12a241cdadbcb4adb4b300
16. d122ba2cacbd1a13211a2d02a2412d0dbcb4adb4b3c0
17. 1423b4d4a23d24131413234123a243a2413a21441343
18. db4abadcacb1dad3141ac212a3a1c3a144ba2db41b43
19. db2a33dcacbd32d313c21142323cc300000000000000
20. 1b33b4d4a2b1dadbc3ca22c000000000000000000000
21. d12443d43232d32323c213c22d2c23234c332db4b300
22. d4a2341cacbddad3142a2344a2ac23421c00adb4b3cb
Take a look at the answers in bold. Did fifteen out of twenty-two
students somehow manage to reel off the same six consecutive correct
answers (the d-a-d-b-c-b string) all by themselves?
There are at least four reasons this is unlikely. One: those questions,
coming near the end of the test, were harder than the earlier
questions. Two: these were mainly subpar students to begin with, few
of whom got six consecutive right answers elsewhere on the test, making
it all the more unlikely they would get right the same six hard
questions. Three: up to this point in the test, the fifteen students answers
were virtually uncorrelated. Four: three of the students (numbers
1, 9, and 12) left more than one answer blank before the
suspicious string and then ended the test with another string of
blanks. This suggests that a long, unbroken string of blank answers
was broken not by the student but by the teacher.
There is another oddity about the suspicious answer string. On
28
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
nine of the fifteen tests, the six correct answers are preceded by another
identical string, 3-a-1-2, which includes three of four incorrect
answers. And on all fifteen tests, the six correct answers are followed
by the same incorrect answer, a 4. Why on earth would a cheating
teacher go to the trouble of erasing a students test sheet and then fill
in the wrong answer?
Perhaps she is merely being strategic. In case she is caught and
hauled into the principals office, she could point to the wrong answers
as proof that she didnt cheat. Or perhapsand this is a less
charitable but just as likely answershe doesnt know the right answers
herself. (With standardized tests, the teacher is typically not
given an answer key.) If this is the case, then we have a pretty good
clue as to why her students are in need of inflated grades in the first
place: they have a bad teacher.
Another indication of teacher cheating in classroom A is the
classs overall performance. As sixth graders who were taking the test
in the eighth month of the academic year, these students needed to
achieve an average score of 6.8 to be considered up to national standards.
(Fifth graders taking the test in the eighth month of the year
needed to score 5.8, seventh graders 7.8, and so on.) The students in
classroom A averaged 5.8 on their sixth-grade tests, which is a full
grade level below where they should be. So plainly these are poor students.
A year earlier, however, these students did even worse, averaging
just 4.1 on their fifth-grade tests. Instead of improving by one full
point between fifth and sixth grade, as would be expected, they improved
by 1.7 points, nearly two grades worth. But this miraculous
improvement was short-lived. When these sixth-grade students
reached seventh grade, they averaged 5.5more than two grade levels
below standard and even worse than they did in sixth grade. Consider
the erratic year-to-year scores of three particular students from
classroom A:
29
FREAK ONOMIC S
5TH GRADE SCORE 6TH GRADE SCORE 7TH GRADE SCORE
Student 3 3.0 6.5 5.1
Student 5 3.6 6.3 4.9
Student 14 3.8 7.1 5.6
The three-year scores from classroom B, meanwhile, are also poor
but at least indicate an honest effort: 4.2, 5.1, and 6.0. So an entire
roomful of children in classroom A suddenly got very smart one year
and very dim the next, or more likely, their sixth-grade teacher
worked some magic with her pencil.
There are two noteworthy points to be made about the children in
classroom A, tangential to the cheating itself. The first is that they are
obviously in poor academic shape, which makes them the very children
whom high-stakes testing is promoted as helping the most. The
second point is that these students (and their parents) would be in for
a terrible shock once they reached the seventh grade. All they knew
was that they had been successfully promoted due to their test scores.
(No child left behind, indeed.) They werent the ones who artificially
jacked up their scores; they probably expected to do great in the seventh
gradeand then they failed miserably. This may be the cruelest
twist yet in high-stakes testing. A cheating teacher may tell herself
that she is helping her students, but the fact is that she would appear
far more concerned with helping herself.
An analysis of the entire Chicago data reveals evidence of teacher
cheating in more than two hundred classrooms per year, roughly 5
percent of the total. This is a conservative estimate, since the algorithm
was able to identify only the most egregious form of cheating
in which teachers systematically changed students answersand not
the many subtler ways a teacher might cheat. In a recent study among
North Carolina schoolteachers, some 35 percent of the respondents
said they had witnessed their colleagues cheating in some fashion,
30
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
whether by giving students extra time, suggesting answers, or manually
changing students answers.
What are the characteristics of a cheating teacher? The Chicago
data shows that male and female teachers are equally prone to cheating.
A cheating teacher tends to be younger and less qualified than average.
She is also more likely to cheat after her incentives change.
Because the Chicago data ran from 1993 to 2000, it bracketed the introduction
of high-stakes testing in 1996. Sure enough, there was a
pronounced spike in cheating in 1996. Nor was the cheating random.
It was the teachers in the lowest-scoring classrooms who were most
likely to cheat. It should also be noted that the $25,000 bonus for
California teachers was eventually revoked, in part because of suspicions
that too much of the money was going to cheaters.
Not every result of the Chicago cheating analysis was so dour. In addition
to detecting cheaters, the algorithm could also identify the best
teachers in the school system. A good teachers impact was nearly as distinctive
as a cheaters. Instead of getting random answers correct, her
students would show real improvement on the easier types of questions
they had previously missed, an indication of actual learning. And a
good teachers students carried over all their gains into the next grade.
Most academic analyses of this sort tend to languish, unread, on a
dusty library shelf. But in early 2002, the new CEO of the Chicago
Public Schools, Arne Duncan, contacted the studys authors. He
didnt want to protest or hush up their findings. Rather, he wanted to
make sure that the teachers identified by the algorithm as cheaters
were truly cheatingand then do something about it.
Duncan was an unlikely candidate to hold such a powerful job.
He was only thirty-six when appointed, a onetime academic all-
American at Harvard who later played pro basketball in Australia. He
had spent just three years with the CPSand never in a job important
enough to have his own secretarybefore becoming its CEO. It
3 1
FREAKONOMICS
didnt hurt that Duncan had grown up in Chicago. His father taught
psychology at the University of Chicago; his mother ran an afterschool
program for forty years, without pay, in a poor neighborhood.
When Duncan was a boy, his afterschool playmates were the underprivileged
kids his mother cared for. So when he took over the public
schools, his allegiance lay more with schoolchildren and their families
than with teachers and their union.
The best way to get rid of cheating teachers, Duncan had decided,
was to readminister the standardized exam. He only had the resources
to retest 120 classrooms, however, so he asked the creators of the
cheating algorithm to help choose which classrooms to test.
How could those 120 retests be used most effectively? It might
have seemed sensible to retest only the classrooms that likely had a
cheating teacher. But even if their retest scores were lower, the teachers
could argue that the students did worse merely because they were
told that the scores wouldnt count in their official recordwhich, in
fact, all retested students would be told. To make the retest results
convincing, some non-cheaters were needed as a control group. The
best control group? The classrooms shown by the algorithm to have
the best teachers, in which big gains were thought to have been legitimately
attained. If those classrooms held their gains while the classrooms
with a suspected cheater lost ground, the cheating teachers
could hardly argue that their students did worse only because the
scores wouldnt count.
So a blend was settled upon. More than half of the 120 retested
classrooms were those suspected of having a cheating teacher. The remainder
were divided between the supposedly excellent teachers
(high scores but no suspicious answer patterns) and, as a further control,
classrooms with mediocre scores and no suspicious answers.
The retest was given a few weeks after the original exam. The children
were not told the reason for the retest. Neither were the teachers.
32
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
But they may have gotten the idea when it was announced that CPS
officials, not the teachers, would administer the test. The teachers
were asked to stay in the classroom with their students, but they
would not be allowed to even touch the answer sheets.
The results were as compelling as the cheating algorithm had predicted.
In the classrooms chosen as controls, where no cheating was
suspected, scores stayed about the same or even rose. In contrast, the
students with the teachers identified as cheaters scored far worse, by
an average of more than a full grade level.
As a result, the Chicago Public School system began to fire its
cheating teachers. The evidence was only strong enough to get rid of a
dozen of them, but the many other cheaters had been duly warned.
The final outcome of the Chicago study is further testament to the
power of incentives: the following year, cheating by teachers fell more
than 30 percent.
You might think that the sophistication of teachers who cheat would
increase along with the level of schooling. But an exam given at the
University of Georgia in the fall of 2001 disputes that idea. The
course was called Coaching Principles and Strategies of Basketball,
and the final grade was based on a single exam that had twenty questions.
Among the questions:
How many halves are in a college basketball game?
a. 1 b. 2 c. 3 d. 4
How many points does a 3-pt. field goal account for in a basketball
game?
a. 1 b. 2 c. 3 d. 4
33
FREAKONOMICS
What is the name of the exam which all high school seniors in the
state of Georgia must pass?
a. Eye Exam
b. How Do the Grits Taste Exam
c. Bug Control Exam
d. Georgia Exit Exam
In your opinion, who is the best Division I assistant coach in the
country?
a. Ron Jirsa
b. John Pelphrey
c. Jim Harrick Jr.
d. Steve Wojciechowski
If you are stumped by the final question, it might help to know
that Coaching Principles was taught by Jim Harrick Jr., an assistant
coach with the universitys basketball team. It might also help to know
that his father, Jim Harrick Sr., was the head basketball coach. Not
surprisingly, Coaching Principles was a favorite course among players
on the Harricks team. Every student in the class received an A.
Not long afterward, both Harricks were relieved of their coaching
duties.
If it strikes you as disgraceful that Chicago schoolteachers and University
of Georgia professors will cheata teacher, after all, is meant
to instill values along with the factsthen the thought of cheating
among sumo wrestlers may also be deeply disturbing. In Japan, sumo
is not only the national sport but also a repository of the countrys religious,
military, and historical emotion. With its purification rituals
and its imperial roots, sumo is sacrosanct in a way that American
34
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
sports will never be. Indeed, sumo is said to be less about competition
than about honor itself.
It is true that sports and cheating go hand in hand. Thats because
cheating is more common in the face of a bright-line incentive (the
line between winning and losing, for instance) than with a murky incentive.
Olympic sprinters and weightlifters, cyclists in the Tour de
France, football linemen and baseball sluggers: they have all been
shown to swallow whatever pill or powder may give them an edge. It
is not only the participants who cheat. Cagey baseball managers try to
steal an opponents signs. In the 2002 Winter Olympic figure-skating
competition, a French judge and a Russian judge were caught trying
to swap votes to make sure their skaters medaled. (The man accused
of orchestrating the vote swap, a reputed Russian mob boss named
Alimzhan Tokhtakhounov, was also suspected of rigging beauty pageants
in Moscow.)
An athlete who gets caught cheating is generally condemned, but
most fans at least appreciate his motive: he wanted so badly to win
that he bent the rules. (As the baseball player Mark Grace once said,
If youre not cheating, youre not trying.) An athlete who cheats to
lose, meanwhile, is consigned to a deep circle of sporting hell. The
1919 Chicago White Sox, who conspired with gamblers to throw the
World Series (and are therefore known forever as the Black Sox), retain
a stench of iniquity among even casual baseball fans. The City
College of New Yorks championship basketball team, once beloved
for its smart and scrappy play, was instantly reviled when it was discovered
in 1951 that several players had taken mob money to shave
pointsintentionally missing baskets to help gamblers beat the point
spread. Remember Terry Malloy, the tormented former boxer played
by Marlon Brando in On the Waterfront? As Malloy saw it, all his troubles
stemmed from the one fight in which he took a dive. Otherwise,
he could have had class; he could have been a contender.
If cheating to lose is sports premier sin, and if sumo wrestling is
35
FREAKONOMICS
the premier sport of a great nation, cheating to lose couldnt possibly
exist in sumo. Could it?
Once again, the data can tell the story. As with the Chicago school
tests, the data set under consideration here is surpassingly large: the
results from nearly every official match among the top rank of Japanese
sumo wrestlers between January 1989 and January 2000, a total
of 32,000 bouts fought by 281 different wrestlers.
The incentive scheme that rules sumo is intricate and extraordinarily
powerful. Each wrestler maintains a ranking that affects every
slice of his life: how much money he makes, how large an entourage
he carries, how much he gets to eat, sleep, and otherwise take advantage
of his success. The sixty-six highest-ranked wrestlers in Japan,
comprising the makuuchi and juryo divisions, make up the sumo elite.
A wrestler near the top of this elite pyramid may earn millions and
is treated like royalty. Any wrestler in the top forty earns at least
$170,000 a year. The seventieth-ranked wrestler in Japan, meanwhile,
earns only $15,000 a year. Life isnt very sweet outside the elite.
Low-ranked wrestlers must tend to their superiors, preparing their
meals, cleaning their quarters, and even soaping up their hardest-toreach
body parts. So ranking is everything.
A wrestlers ranking is based on his performance in the elite tournaments
that are held six times a year. Each wrestler has fifteen bouts
per tournament, one per day over fifteen consecutive days. If he finishes
the tournament with a winning record (eight victories or better),
his ranking will rise. If he has a losing record, his ranking falls. If it
falls far enough, he is booted from the elite rank entirely. The eighth
victory in any tournament is therefore critical, the difference between
promotion and demotion; it is roughly four times as valuable in the
rankings as the typical victory.
So a wrestler entering the final day of a tournament on the bubble,
with a 77 record, has far more to gain from a victory than an opponent
with a record of 86 has to lose.
36
S c h o o l t e a c h e r s a n d S umo W r e s t l e r s
Is it possible, then, that an 86 wrestler might allow a 77 wrestler
to beat him? A sumo bout is a concentrated flurry of force and speed
and leverage, often lasting only a few seconds. It wouldnt be very hard
to let yourself be tossed. Lets imagine for a moment that sumo
wrestling is rigged. How might we measure the data to prove it?
The first step would be to isolate the bouts in question: those
fought on a tournaments final day between a wrestler on the bubble
and a wrestler who has already secured his eighth win. (Because more
than half of all wrestlers end a tournament with either seven, eight, or
nine victories, hundreds of bouts fit these criteria.) A final-day match
between two 77 wrestlers isnt likely to be fixed, since both fighters
badly need the victory. A wrestler with ten or more victories probably
wouldnt throw a match either, since he has his own strong incentive
to win: the $100,000 prize for overall tournament champion and a series
of $20,000 prizes for the outstanding technique award, fighting
spirit award, and others.
Lets now consider the following statistic, which represents the
hundreds of matches in which a 77 wrestler faced an 86 wrestler on
a tournaments final day. The left column tallies the probability, based
on all past meetings between the two wrestlers fighting that day, that
the 77 wrestler will win. The right column shows how often the 77
wrestler actually did win.
77 WRESTLERS
PREDICTED WIN PERCENTAGE
AGAINST 86 OPPONENT
77 WRESTLERS
ACTUAL WIN PERCENTAGE
AGAINST 86 OPPONENT
48.7 79.6
So the 77 wrestler, based on past outcomes, was expected to win
just less than half the time. This makes sense; their records in this
tournament indicate that the 86 wrestler is slightly better. But in actuality,
the wrestler on the bubble won almost eight out of ten matches
37
FREAK ONOMIC S
against his 86 opponent. Wrestlers on the bubble also do astonishingly
well against 95 opponents:
77 WRESTLERS
PREDICTED WIN PERCENTAGE
AGAINST 95 OPPONENT
77 WRESTLERS
ACTUAL WIN PERCENTAGE
AGAINST 95 OPPONENT
47.2 73.4
As suspicious as this looks, a high winning percentage alone isnt
enough to prove that a match is rigged. Since so much depends on a
wrestlers eighth win, he should be expected to fight harder in a crucial
bout. But perhaps there are further clues in the data that prove collusion.
Its worth thinking about the incentive a wrestler might have to
throw a match. Maybe he accepts a bribe (which would obviously not
be recorded in the data). Or perhaps some other arrangement is made
between the two wrestlers. Keep in mind that the pool of elite sumo
wrestlers is extraordinarily tight-knit. Each of the sixty-six elite
wrestlers fights fifteen of the others in a tournament every two
months. Furthermore, each wrestler belongs to a stable that is typically
managed by a former sumo champion, so even the rival stables
have close ties. (Wrestlers from the same stable do not wrestle one another.)
Now lets look at the win-loss percentage between the 77
wrestlers and the 86 wrestlers the next time they meet, when neither
one is on the bubble. In this case, there is no great pressure on the individual
match. So you might expect the wrestlers who won their 77
matches in the previous tournament to do about as well as they had
in earlier matches against these same opponentsthat is, winning
roughly 50 percent of the time. You certainly wouldnt expect them to
uphold their 80 percent clip.
38
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
As it turns out, the data show that the 77 wrestlers win only 40
percent of the rematches. Eighty percent in one match and 40 percent
in the next? How do you make sense of that?
The most logical explanation is that the wrestlers made a quid pro
quo agreement: you let me win today, when I really need the victory,
and Ill let you win the next time. (Such an arrangement wouldnt preclude
a cash bribe.) Its especially interesting to note that by the two
wrestlers second subsequent meeting, the win percentages revert to
the expected level of about 50 percent, suggesting that the collusion
spans only two matches.
And it isnt only the individual wrestlers whose records are suspect.
The collective records of the various sumo stables are similarly aberrational.
When one stables wrestlers fare well on the bubble against
wrestlers from a second stable, they tend to do especially poorly when
the second stables wrestlers are on the bubble. This indicates that
some match rigging may be choreographed at the highest level of the
sportmuch like the Olympic skating judges vote swapping.
No formal disciplinary action has ever been taken against a Japanese
sumo wrestler for match rigging. Officials from the Japanese
Sumo Association typically dismiss any such charges as fabrications
by disgruntled former wrestlers. In fact, the mere utterance of the
words sumo and rigged in the same sentence can cause a national
furor. People tend to get defensive when the integrity of their national
sport is impugned.
Still, allegations of match rigging do occasionally find their way
into the Japanese media. These occasional media storms offer one
more chance to measure possible corruption in sumo. Media scrutiny,
after all, creates a powerful incentive: if two sumo wrestlers or their
stables have been rigging matches, they might be leery to continue
when a swarm of journalists and TV cameras descend upon them.
So what happens in such cases? The data show that in the sumo
39
FREAKONOMICS
tournaments held immediately after allegations of match rigging, 77
wrestlers win only 50 percent of their final-day matches against 86
opponents instead of the typical 80 percent. No matter how the data
are sliced, they inevitably suggest one thing: it is hard to argue that
sumo wrestling isnt rigged.
Several years ago, two former sumo wrestlers came forward with
extensive allegations of match riggingand more. Aside from the
crooked matches, they said, sumo was rife with drug use and sexcapades,
bribes and tax evasion, and close ties to the yakuza, the Japanese
mafia. The two men began to receive threatening phone calls;
one of them told friends he was afraid he would be killed by the
yakuza. Still, they went forward with plans to hold a press conference
at the Foreign Correspondents Club in Tokyo. But shortly beforehand,
the two men diedhours apart, in the same hospital, of a similar
respiratory ailment. The police declared there had been no foul
play but did not conduct an investigation. It seems very strange for
these two people to die on the same day at the same hospital, said
Mitsuru Miyake, the editor of a sumo magazine. But no one has seen
them poisoned, so you cant prove the skepticism.
Whether or not their deaths were intentional, these two men had
done what no other sumo insider had previously done: named names.
Of the 281 wrestlers covered in the data cited above, they identified
29 crooked wrestlers and 11 who were said to be incorruptible.
What happens when the whistle-blowers corroborating evidence
is factored into the analysis of the match data? In matches between
two supposedly corrupt wrestlers, the wrestler who was on the bubble
won about 80 percent of the time. In bubble matches against a supposedly
clean opponent, meanwhile, the bubble wrestler was no more
likely to win than his record would predict. Furthermore, when a
supposedly corrupt wrestler faced an opponent whom the whistleblowers
did not name as either corrupt or clean, the results were
40
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
nearly as skewed as when two corrupt wrestlers metsuggesting that
most wrestlers who werent specifically named were also corrupt.
So if sumo wrestlers, schoolteachers, and day-care parents all cheat,
are we to assume that mankind is innately and universally corrupt?
And if so, how corrupt?
The answer may lie in . . . bagels. Consider this story about a man
named Paul Feldman.
Once upon a time, Feldman dreamed big dreams. With early
training in agricultural economics, he wanted to tackle world hunger.
Instead, he took a job in Washington, analyzing weapons expenditures
for the U.S. Navy. This was in 1962. For the next twenty-odd
years, he did further analytic work in Washington. He held seniorlevel
jobs and earned good money, but he wasnt always recognized for
his best work. At the office Christmas party, colleagues would introduce
him to their wives not as the head of the public research group
(which he was) but as the guy who brings in the bagels.
The bagels had begun as a casual gesture: a boss treating his employees
whenever they won a research contract. Then he made it a
habit. Every Friday, he would bring in some bagels, a serrated knife,
and cream cheese. When employees from neighboring floors heard
about the bagels, they wanted some too. Eventually he was bringing
in fifteen dozen bagels a week. In order to recoup his costs, he set out
a cash basket and a sign with the suggested price. His collection rate
was about 95 percent; he attributed the underpayment to oversight,
not fraud.
In 1984, when his research institute fell under new management,
Feldman took a look at his future and grimaced. He decided to quit
his job and sell bagels. His economist friends thought he had lost his
4 1
FREAKONOMICS
mind, but his wife supported him. The last of their three children was
finishing college, and they had retired their mortgage.
Driving around the office parks that encircle Washington, he solicited
customers with a simple pitch: early in the morning, he would
deliver some bagels and a cash basket to a companys snack room; he
would return before lunch to pick up the money and the leftovers. It
was an honor-system commerce scheme, and it worked. Within a few
years, Feldman was delivering 8,400 bagels a week to 140 companies
and earning as much as he had ever made as a research analyst. He had
thrown off the shackles of cubicle life and made himself happy.
He had alsoquite without meaning todesigned a beautiful economic
experiment. From the beginning, Feldman kept rigorous data
on his bagel business. So by measuring the money collected against the
bagels taken, he found it possible to tell, down to the penny, just how
honest his customers were. Did they steal from him? If so, what were
the characteristics of a company that stole versus a company that did
not? Under what circumstances did people tend to steal more, or less?
As it happens, Feldmans accidental study provides a window onto
a form of cheating that has long stymied academics: white-collar
crime. (Yes, shorting the bagel man is white-collar crime, writ however
small.) It might seem ludicrous to address as large and intractable
a problem as white-collar crime through the life of a bagel man. But
often a small and simple question can help chisel away at the biggest
problems.
Despite all the attention paid to rogue companies like Enron, academics
know very little about the practicalities of white-collar crime.
The reason? There are no good data. A key fact of white-collar crime
is that we hear about only the very slim fraction of people who are
caught cheating. Most embezzlers lead quiet and theoretically happy
lives; employees who steal company property are rarely detected.
With street crime, meanwhile, that is not the case. A mugging or a
42
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
burglary or a murder is usually tallied whether or not the criminal is
caught. A street crime has a victim, who typically reports the crime to
the police, who generate data, which in turn generate thousands of academic
papers by criminologists, sociologists, and economists. But
white-collar crime presents no obvious victim. From whom, exactly,
did the masters of Enron steal? And how can you measure something
if you dont know to whom it happened, or with what frequency, or in
what magnitude?
Paul Feldmans bagel business was different. It did present a victim.
The victim was Paul Feldman.
When he started his business, he expected a 95 percent payment rate,
based on the experience at his own office. But just as crime tends to be
low on a street where a police car is parked, the 95 percent rate was artificially
high: Feldmans presence had deterred theft. Not only that,
but those bagel eaters knew the provider and had feelings (presumably
good ones) about him. A broad swath of psychological and economic
research has shown that people will pay different amounts for the
same item depending on who is providing it. The economist Richard
Thaler, in his 1985 Beer on the Beach study, showed that a thirsty
sunbather would pay $2.65 for a beer delivered from a resort hotel but
only $1.50 for the same beer if it came from a shabby grocery store.
In the real world, Feldman learned to settle for less than 95 percent.
He came to consider a company honest if its payment rate was
above 90 percent. He considered a rate between 80 and 90 percent
annoying but tolerable. If a company habitually paid below 80 percent,
Feldman might post a hectoring note, like this one:
The cost of bagels has gone up dramatically since the beginning
of the year. Unfortunately, the number of bagels that disappear
43
FREAKONOMICS
without being paid for has also gone up. Dont let that continue.
I dont imagine that you would teach your children to
cheat, so why do it yourselves?
In the beginning, Feldman left behind an open basket for the
cash, but too often the money vanished. Then he tried a coffee can
with a money slot in its plastic lid, which also proved too tempting.
In the end, he resorted to making small plywood boxes with a slot
cut into the top. The wooden box has worked well. Each year he drops
off about seven thousand boxes and loses, on average, just one to
theft. This is an intriguing statistic: the same people who routinely
steal more than 10 percent of his bagels almost never stoop to stealing
his money boxa tribute to the nuanced social calculus of theft.
From Feldmans perspective, an office worker who eats a bagel without
paying is committing a crime; the office worker probably doesnt
think so. This distinction probably has less to do with the admittedly
small amount of money involved (Feldmans bagels cost one dollar
each, cream cheese included) than with the context of the crime.
The same office worker who fails to pay for his bagel might also help
himself to a long slurp of soda while filling a glass in a self-serve
restaurant, but he is very unlikely to leave the restaurant without
paying.
So what do the bagel data have to say? In recent years, there have
been two noteworthy trends in the overall payment rate. The first was
a long, slow decline that began in 1992. By the summer of 2001, the
overall rate had slipped to about 87 percent. But immediately after
September 11 of that year, the rate spiked a full 2 percent and hasnt
slipped much since. (If a 2 percent gain in payment doesnt sound like
much, think of it this way: the nonpayment rate fell from 13 to 11
percent, which amounts to a 15 percent decline in theft.) Because
many of Feldmans customers are affiliated with national security,
44
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
there may have been a patriotic element to this 9/11 Effect. Or it may
have represented a more general surge in empathy.
The data also show that smaller offices are more honest than big
ones. An office with a few dozen employees generally outpays by 3 to
5 percent an office with a few hundred employees. This may seem
counterintuitive. In a bigger office, a bigger crowd is bound to convene
around the bagel table, providing more witnesses to make sure
you drop your money in the box. But in the big-office/small-office
comparison, bagel crime seems to mirror street crime. There is far less
street crime per capita in rural areas than in cities, in large part because
a rural criminal is more likely to be known (and therefore
caught). Also, a smaller community tends to exert greater social incentives
against crime, the main one being shame.
The bagel data also reflect how much personal mood seems to affect
honesty. Weather, for instance, is a major factor. Unseasonably
pleasant weather inspires people to pay at a higher rate. Unseasonably
cold weather, meanwhile, makes people cheat prolifically; so do heavy
rain and wind. Worst are the holidays. The week of Christmas produces
a 2 percent drop in payment ratesagain, a 15 percent increase
in theft, an effect on the same magnitude, in reverse, as that of 9/11.
Thanksgiving is nearly as bad; the week of Valentines Day is also
lousy, as is the week straddling April 15. There are, however, several
good holidays: the weeks that include the Fourth of July, Labor Day,
and Columbus Day. The difference in the two sets of holidays? The
low-cheating holidays represent little more than an extra day off from
work. The high-cheating holidays are fraught with miscellaneous
anxieties and the high expectations of loved ones.
Feldman has also reached some of his own conclusions about honesty,
based more on his experience than the data. He has come to believe
that morale is a big factorthat an office is more honest when
the employees like their boss and their work. He also believes that em-
45
FREAKONOMICS
ployees further up the corporate ladder cheat more than those down
below. He got this idea after delivering for years to one company
spread out over three floorsan executive floor on top and two lower
floors with sales, service, and administrative employees. (Feldman
wondered if perhaps the executives cheated out of an overdeveloped
sense of entitlement. What he didnt consider is that perhaps cheating
was how they got to be executives.)
If morality represents the way we would like the world to work and
economics represents how it actually does work, then the story of
Feldmans bagel business lies at the very intersection of morality and
economics. Yes, a lot of people steal from him, but the vast majority,
even though no one is watching over them, do not. This outcome
may surprise some peopleincluding Feldmans economist friends,
who counseled him twenty years ago that his honor-system scheme
would never work. But it would not have surprised Adam Smith. In
fact, the theme of Smiths first book, The Theory of Moral Sentiments,
was the innate honesty of mankind. How selfish soever man may be
supposed, Smith wrote, there are evidently some principles in his
nature, which interest him in the fortune of others, and render their
happiness necessary to him, though he derives nothing from it, except
the pleasure of seeing it.
There is a tale, The Ring of Gyges, that Feldman sometimes tells
his economist friends. It comes from Platos Republic. A student
named Glaucon offered the story in response to a lesson by Socrates
who, like Adam Smith, argued that people are generally good even
without enforcement. Glaucon, like Feldmans economist friends, disagreed.
He told of a shepherd named Gyges who stumbled upon a secret
cavern with a corpse inside that wore a ring. When Gyges put on
the ring, he found that it made him invisible. With no one able to
46
Sc h o o l te a c h e r s a n d Sumo Wre s t l e r s
monitor his behavior, Gyges proceeded to do woeful thingsseduce
the queen, murder the king, and so on. Glaucons story posed a moral
question: could any man resist the temptation of evil if he knew his
acts could not be witnessed? Glaucon seemed to think the answer was
no. But Paul Feldman sides with Socrates and Adam Smithfor he
knows that the answer, at least 87 percent of the time, is yes.
47

2 How Is the Ku Klux Klan Like a
Group of Real-Estate Agents?
As institutions go, the Ku Klux Klan has had a markedly up-anddown
history. It was founded in the immediate aftermath of the Civil
War by six former Confederate soldiers in Pulaski, Tennessee. The six
young men, four of whom were budding lawyers, saw themselves as
merely a circle of like-minded friends. Thus the name they chose,
kuklux, a slight mangling of kuklos, the Greek word for circle. In
the beginning, their activities were said to be harmless midnight
pranksfor instance, riding horses through the countryside while
draped in white sheets and pillowcase hoods. But soon the Klan
evolved into a multistate terrorist organization designed to frighten
and kill emancipated slaves. Among its regional leaders were five former
Confederate generals; its staunchest supporters were the plantation
owners for whom Reconstruction posed an economic and
political nightmare. In 1872, President Ulysses S. Grant spelled out
for the House of Representatives the true aims of the Ku Klux Klan:
By force and terror, to prevent all political action not in accord with
FREAKONOMICS
the views of the members, to deprive colored citizens of the right to
bear arms and of the right of a free ballot, to suppress the schools in
which colored children were taught, and to reduce the colored people
to a condition closely allied to that of slavery.
The early Klan did its work through pamphleteering, lynching,
shooting, burning, castrating, pistol-whipping, and a thousand forms
of intimidation. They targeted former slaves and any whites who supported
the blacks rights to vote, acquire land, or gain an education.
But within barely a decade, the Klan had been extinguished, largely
by legal and military interventions out of Washington, D.C.
If the Klan itself was defeated, however, its aims had largely been
achieved through the establishment of Jim Crow laws. Congress,
which during Reconstruction had been quick to enact measures of
legal, social, and economic freedom for blacks, just as quickly began
to roll them back. The federal government agreed to withdraw its occupation
troops from the South, allowing the restoration of white
rule. In Plessy v. Ferguson, the U.S. Supreme Court gave the go-ahead
to full-scale racial segregation.
The Ku Klux Klan lay largely dormant until 1915, when D. W.
Griffiths film The Birth of a Nation (originally titled The Clansman)
helped spark its rebirth. Griffith presented the Klan as crusaders for
white civilization itself, and as one of the noblest forces in American
history. The film quoted a line from A History of the American People,
written by a renowned historian: At last there had sprung into existence
a great Ku Klux Klan, a veritable empire of the South, to protect
the Southern country. The historian in question was U.S. president
Woodrow Wilson, onetime scholar and president of Princeton University.
By the 1920s, a revived Klan claimed eight million members. This
time around, the Klan was not confined to the South but ranged
throughout the country; this time, it concerned itself not only with
50
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
blacks but also with Catholics, Jews, communists, unionists, immigrants,
agitators, and other disrupters of the status quo. In 1933, with
Hitler ascendant in Germany, Will Rogers was the first to draw a line
between the new Klan and the new threat in Europe: Papers all state
Hitler is trying to copy Mussolini, he wrote. Looks to me like its
the Ku Klux that he is copying.
The onset of World War II and a number of internal scandals once
again laid the Klan low. Public sentiment turned against the Klan as
the unity of a country at war trumped its message of separatism.
But within a few years, there were already signs of a massive revival.
As wartime anxiety gave way to postwar uncertainty, Klan membership
flourished. Barely two months after V-J Day, the Klan in Atlanta
burned a 300-foot cross on the face of Stone Mountain, site of a storied
rock carving of Robert E. Lee. The extravagant cross burning,
one Klansman later said, was intended just to let the niggers know
the war is over and that the Klan is back on the market.
Atlanta had by now become Klan headquarters. The Klan was
thought to hold great sway with key Georgia politicians, and its Georgia
chapters were said to include many policemen and sheriff s
deputies. Yes, the Klan was a secret society, reveling in passwords and
cloak-and-dagger ploys, but its real power lay in the very public fear
that it fostered, exemplified by the open secret that the Ku Klux Klan
and the law-enforcement establishment were brothers in arms.
Atlantathe Imperial City of the KKKs Invisible Empire, in Klan
jargonwas also home to Stetson Kennedy, a thirty-year-old man
with the bloodlines of a Klansman but a temperament that ran opposite.
He came from a good southern family which claimed ancestors
including two signers of the Declaration of Independence, an
officer in the Confederate Army, and John B. Stetson, founder of the
famed hat company and the man for whom Stetson University was
named.
5 1
FREAKONOMICS
Stetson Kennedy grew up in a fourteen-room house in Jacksonville,
Florida, the youngest of five children. His uncle Brady was a
Klansman. But Kennedy would go on to become a self-described dissident
at large, writing numberless articles and several books that
railed against bigotry. He first worked as a folklorist, traveling around
Florida to collect old native tales and songs. Years later, when he
served as a rare white correspondent for the Pittsburgh Courier, the
countrys largest black newspaper, he wrote under the pseudonym
Daddy Mentionafter a black folk hero who, as myth told it, could
outrun the blast of a sheriff s shotgun.
What drove Kennedy was a hatred of small-mindedness, ignorance,
obstructionism, and intimidationwhich, in his view, were
displayed by no organization more proudly than the Ku Klux Klan.
Kennedy saw the Klan as the terrorist arm of the white establishment
itself. This struck him as an intractable problem, for a variety of reasons.
The Klan was in cahoots with political, business, and lawenforcement
leaders. The public was frightened and felt powerless to
act against the Klan. And the few anti-hate groups that existed at the
time had little leverage or even information about the Klan. Almost
all of the things written on the subject were editorials, not exposs,
Kennedy would later explain. The writers were against the Klan, all
right, but they had precious few inside facts about it.
So Kennedy set out to gather those facts. He would spend years
interviewing Klan leaders and sympathizers, sometimes taking advantage
of his own background and lineage to pretend that he was
on their side of the issues. He also attended public Klan events and,
as he would later write, he even set about to infiltrate the Klan in
Atlanta.
The Klan Unmasked, Kennedys memoir of his exploits inside the
Klan, is in fact more of a novelization than a straight nonfiction account.
Kennedy, a folklorist at heart, apparently wanted to put across
52
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
the most dramatic story possible, and therefore included not only his
own anti-Klan activities but those of another man, code-named John
Brown. Brown was a union worker and a former Klan official who
had changed his ways and offered to infiltrate the Klan. It was John
Brown who apparently performed many of the most dramatic and
dangerous episodes portrayed in The Klan Unmaskedphysically attending
Klan meetings and other functions in Atlantabut since
Stetson Kennedy was the man who later wrote the book, he rendered
Browns actions as his own.
Regardless, there was a great deal of information to be gleaned
from this Brown/Kennedy collaboration. Brown divulged what he
was learning at the weekly Klan meetings: the identities of the Klans
local and regional leaders; their upcoming plans; the Klans current
rituals, passwords, and language. It was Klan custom, for instance, to
append a Kl to many words. (Thus would two Klansmen hold a Klonversation
in the local Klavern.) The secret Klan handshake was a lefthanded,
limp-wristed fish wiggle. When a traveling Klansman
wanted to locate brethren in a strange town, he would ask for a Mr.
AyakAyak being code for Are You a Klansman? He would
hope to hear this response: Yes, and I also know a Mr. Akaicode
for A Klansman Am I.
Before long, John Brown was invited to join the Klavaliers, the
Klans secret police and flog squad. For an infiltrator, this posed a
particularly sticky problem: What would happen if he were called
upon to inflict violence?
But as it happened, a central tenet of life in the Klanand of terrorism
in generalis that most of the threatened violence never goes
beyond the threat stage.
Consider lynching, the Klans hallmark sign of violence. Here,
compiled by the Tuskegee Institute, are the decade-by-decade statistics
on the lynching of blacks in the United States:
53
FREAK ONOMIC S
YEARS LYNCHINGS OF BLACKS
18901899 1,111
19001909 791
19101919 569
19201929 281
19301939 119
19401949 31
19501959 6
19601969 3
Bear in mind that these figures represent not only lynchings attributed
to the Ku Klux Klan but the total number of reported lynchings.
The statistics reveal at least three noteworthy facts. The first is the obvious
decrease in lynchings over time. The second is the absence of a
correlation between lynchings and Klan membership: there were actually
more lynchings of blacks between 1900 and 1909, when the
Klan was dormant, than during the 1920s, when the Klan had millions
of memberswhich suggests that the Ku Klux Klan carried out
far fewer lynchings than is generally thought.
Third, relative to the size of the black population, lynchings were
exceedingly rare. To be sure, one lynching is one too many. But by the
turn of the century, lynchings were hardly the everyday occurrence
that they are often considered in the public recollection. Compare the
281 victims of lynchings in the 1920s to the number of black infants
who were dying at that time as a result of malnutrition, pneumonia,
diarrhea, and the like. As of 1920, about 13 out of every 100 black
children died in infancy, or roughly 20,000 children each yearcompared
to 28 people who were lynched in a year. As late as 1940, about
10,000 black infants died each year.
What larger truths do these lynching figures suggest? What does
it mean that lynchings were relatively rare and that they fell pre-
54
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
cipitously over time, even in the face of a boom in Klan membership?
The most compelling explanation is that all those early lynchings
worked. White racistswhether or not they belonged to the Ku Klux
Klanhad through their actions and their rhetoric developed a
strong incentive scheme that was terribly clear and terribly frightening.
If a black person violated the accepted code of behavior, whether
by talking back to a bus driver or daring to try to vote, he knew he
might well be punished, perhaps by death.
So it may be that by the mid-1940s, when Stetson Kennedy was
trying to bust up the Klan, it didnt really need to use as much violence.
Many blacks, having long been told to behave like second-class
citizensor elsesimply obliged. One or two lynchings went a long
way toward inducing docility among even a large group of people, for
people respond strongly to strong incentives. And there are few incentives
more powerful than the fear of random violencewhich, in
essence, is why terrorism is so effective.
But if the Ku Klux Klan of the 1940s wasnt uniformly violent,
what was it? The Klan that Stetson Kennedy wrote about was in fact a
sorry fraternity of men, most of them poorly educated and with poor
prospects, who needed a place to ventand an excuse for occasionally
staying out all night. That their fraternity engaged in quasireligious
chanting and oath taking and hosanna hailing, all of it top
secret, made it that much more appealing.
Kennedy also found the Klan to be a slick money-making operation,
at least for those near the top of the organization. Klan leaders
had any number of revenue sources: thousands of dues-paying rankand-
file members; business owners who hired the Klan to scare off the
unions or who paid the Klan protection money; Klan rallies that
generated huge cash donations; even the occasional gunrunning or
moonshine operation. Then there were rackets like the Klans Death
55
FREAKONOMICS
Benefit Association, which sold insurance policies to Klan members
and accepted only cash or personal checks made out to the Grand
Dragon himself.
And, even though the Klan may not have been as deadly as generally
thought, it was plenty violent and, perhaps worse, had ever
greater designs on political influence. Kennedy was therefore eager to
damage the Klan in any way he could. When he heard about Klan
plans for a union-busting rally, he fed the information to a union
friend. He passed along Klan information to the assistant attorney
general of Georgia, an established Klan buster. After researching the
Klans corporate charter, Kennedy wrote to the governor of Georgia
suggesting the grounds upon which the charter should be revoked:
the Klan had been designated a non-profit, non-political organization,
but Kennedy had proof that it was clearly devoted to both profits
and politics.
The problem was that most of Kennedys efforts werent producing
the desired effect. The Klan was so entrenched and broad-based that
Kennedy felt as if he were tossing pebbles at a giant. And even if he
could somehow damage the Klan in Atlanta, the hundreds of other
chapters around the country would go untouched.
Kennedy was supremely frustrated, and out of this frustration was
born a new strategy. He had noticed one day a group of young boys
playing some kind of spy game in which they exchanged silly secret
passwords. It reminded him of the Klan. Wouldnt it be nice, he
thought, to get the Klans passwords and the rest of its secrets into the
hands of kids all across the countryand their parents too? What
better way to defang a secret society than to make public its most
secret information? Instead of futilely attacking the Klan from the
outside, what if he could somehow unleash all the secret inside
information that John Brown was gathering from the Klans weekly
meetings? Between Browns inside dope and everything that Kennedy
56
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
had learned via his own investigations, he probably knew more Klan
secrets than the average Klansman.
Kennedy turned to the most powerful mass medium of his day:
radio. He began feeding Klan reports to the journalist Drew Pearson,
whose Washington Merry-Go-Round program was heard by millions of
adults every day, and to the producers of the Adventures of Superman
show, which reached millions of children each night. He told them
about Mr. Ayak and Mr. Akai, and he passed along overheated passages
from the Klans bible, which was called the Kloran. (Kennedy
never did learn why a white Christian supremacist group would give
its bible essentially the same name as the most holy book of Islam.)
He explained the role of Klan officers in any local Klavern: the Klaliff
(vice president), Klokard (lecturer), Kludd (chaplain), Kligrapp (secretary),
Klabee (treasurer), Kladd (conductor), Klarogo (inner guard),
Klexter (outer guard), the Klokann (a five-man investigative committee),
and the Klavaliers (whose leader was called Chief Ass Tearer). He
spelled out the Klan hierarchy as it proceeded from the local to the national
level: an Exalted Cyclops and his twelve Terrors; a Great Titan
and his twelve Furies; a Grand Dragon and his nine Hydras; and the
Imperial Wizard and his fifteen Genii. And Kennedy passed along all
the information and gossip that John Brown gleaned by infiltrating
the main Klan chapter, Nathan Bedford Forrest Klavern No. 1, Atlanta,
Realm of Georgia.
During the war, the Adventures of Superman program had portrayed
its hero fighting Hitler and Mussolini and Hirohito. But now
he was in need of fresh villains. The Klan was a perfect target, and Superman
turned his powers against them. Drew Pearson, an avowed
Klan hater, now began giving regular Klan updates on his radio show,
and then gave further updates, based on John Browns inside reports,
to show how the original updates were infuriating Klan officials.
Pearsons work created an echo chamber that seemed to be driving
57
FREAKONOMICS
Grand Dragon Samuel Green crazy. Here is Pearsons radio report
from November 17, 1948:
Speaking at Klavern No. 1, Atlanta, Ga., the week after elections,
the Grand Dragon wrung his hands and once again cautioned
Klansmen to be careful about leaks.
I have to talk frankly at these meetings, he said, but I
might as well call Drew Pearson before I come to the meeting
and give him the information, for [the] next day he gives it
out to everybody from coast to coast. The A.P. and U.P. are
both calling me about it next morning while I am eating breakfast.
. . .
The Grand Dragon spoke about plans for a big crossburning
to be held in Macon, Ga., on Dec. 10. It would be the
biggest in Klan history, he said, and he expected 10,000 Klansmen
to be therein their robes. . . .
He added that the Klavalier Klubthe Klans whipping and
flogging departmentwas now on the job and had plenty of
friends on the Atlanta police force.
As the Pearson and Superman radio shows played on, and as Stetson
Kennedy continued to relay the Klan secrets obtained by John
Brown to other broadcast and print outlets, a funny thing happened:
attendance at Klan meetings began to fall, as did applications for
new membership. Of all the ideas that Kennedy had thought up to
fight bigotry, this campaign was easily the cleverest. He turned the
Klans secrecy against itself by making its private information public;
he converted heretofore precious knowledge into ammunition for
mockery.
Americans who might have been philosophically inclined to oppose
the Klan had now been given enough specific information to
58
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
oppose them more actively, and public sentiment began to shift.
Americans who might have been philosophically inclined to embrace
the Klan had now been given all sorts of caution against doing so. Although
the Klan would never quite die, especially down south
David Duke, a smooth-talking Klan leader from Louisiana, mounted
substantive bids for the U.S. Senate and other officesit was certainly
handicapped, at least in the short term, by Kennedys brazen
dissemination of inside information. While it is impossible to tease
out the exact impact that his work had on the Klan, many people have
given him a great deal of credit for damaging an institution that was
in grave need of being damaged.
This did not come about because Stetson Kennedy was courageous
or resolute or unflappable, even though he was all of these. It happened
because he understood the raw power of information. The Ku
Klux Klanmuch like politicians or real-estate agents or stockbrokers
was a group whose power was derived in large part from the fact
that it hoarded information. Once that information falls into the
wrong hands (or, depending on your point of view, the right hands),
much of the groups advantage disappears.
In the late 1990s, the price of term life insurance fell dramatically.
This posed something of a mystery, for the decline had no obvious
cause. Other types of insurance, including health and automobile and
homeowners coverage, were certainly not falling in price. Nor had
there been any radical changes among insurance companies, insurance
brokers, or the people who buy term life insurance. So what happened?
The Internet happened. In the spring of 1996, Quotesmith.com
became the first of several websites that enabled a customer to compare,
within seconds, the price of term life insurance sold by dozens of
59
FREAKONOMICS
different companies. For such websites, term life insurance was a perfect
product. Unlike other forms of insuranceespecially whole life
insurance, which is a far more complicated financial instrument
term life policies are fairly homogeneous: any given thirty-year, guaranteed
policy for $1 million is essentially identical to the next. So
what really matters is the price. Shopping around for the cheapest
policy, a process that had been convoluted and time-consuming, was
suddenly made simple. With customers able to instantaneously find
the cheapest policy, the more expensive companies had no choice but
to lower their prices. Suddenly customers were paying $1 billion less a
year for term life insurance.
It is worth noting that these websites only listed prices; they didnt
even sell the policies. So it wasnt really insurance they were peddling.
Like Stetson Kennedy, they were dealing in information. (Had the Internet
been around when Kennedy was attacking the Klan, he probably
would have been blogging his brains out.) To be sure, there are
differences between exposing the Ku Klux Klan and exposing insurance
companies high premiums. The Klan trafficked in secret information
whose secrecy engendered fear, while insurance prices were
less a secret than a set of facts dispensed in a way that made comparisons
difficult. But in both instances, the dissemination of the information
diluted its power. As Supreme Court Justice Louis D.
Brandeis once wrote, Sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants.
Information is a beacon, a cudgel, an olive branch, a deterrentall
depending on who wields it and how. Information is so powerful that
the assumption of information, even if the information does not actually
exist, can have a sobering effect. Consider the case of a one-dayold
car.
The day that a car is driven off the lot is the worst day in its life, for
it instantly loses as much as a quarter of its value. This might seem
absurd, but we know it to be true. A new car that was bought for
$20,000 cannot be resold for more than perhaps $15,000. Why? Be-
60
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
cause the only person who might logically want to resell a brand-new
car is someone who found the car to be a lemon. So even if the car isnt
a lemon, a potential buyer assumes that it is. He assumes that the
seller has some information about the car that he, the buyer, does not
haveand the seller is punished for this assumed information.
And if the car is a lemon? The seller would do well to wait a year to
sell it. By then, the suspicion of lemonness will have faded; by then,
some people will be selling their perfectly good year-old cars, and the
lemon can blend in with them, likely selling for more than it is truly
worth.
It is common for one party to a transaction to have better information
than another party. In the parlance of economists, such a case is
known as an information asymmetry. We accept as a verity of capitalism
that someone (usually an expert) knows more than someone else
(usually a consumer). But information asymmetries everywhere have
in fact been gravely wounded by the Internet.
Information is the currency of the Internet. As a medium, the Internet
is brilliantly efficient at shifting information from the hands of
those who have it into the hands of those who do not. Often, as in the
case of term life insurance prices, the information existed but in a
woefully scattered way. (In such instances, the Internet acts like a
gigantic horseshoe magnet waved over an endless sea of haystacks,
plucking the needle out of each one.) The Internet has accomplished
what even the most fervent consumer advocates usually cannot: it has
vastly shrunk the gap between the experts and the public.
The Internet has proven particularly fruitful for situations in
which a face-to-face encounter with an expert might actually exacerbate
the problem of asymmetrical informationsituations in which
an expert uses his informational advantage to make us feel stupid or
rushed or cheap or ignoble. Consider a scenario in which your loved
one has just died and now the funeral director (who knows that you
know next to nothing about his business and are under emotional
6 1
FREAKONOMICS
duress to boot) steers you to the $8,000 mahogany casket. Or consider
the automobile dealership: a salesman does his best to obscure the cars
base price under a mountain of add-ons and incentives. Later, however,
in the cool-headed calm of your home, you can use the Internet
to find out exactly how much the dealer paid the manufacturer for
that car. Or you might just log on to www.TributeDirect.com and buy
that mahogany casket yourself for only $3,595, delivered overnight.
Unless you decide to spend $2,300 for The Last Hole (a casket with
golf scenes) or Memories of the Hunt (featuring big-racked bucks
and other prey) or one of the much cheaper models that the funeral director
somehow failed even to mention.
The Internet, powerful as it is, has hardly slain the beast that is information
asymmetry. Consider the so-called corporate scandals of the
early 2000s. The crimes committed by Enron included hidden partnerships,
disguised debt, and the manipulation of energy markets.
Henry Blodget of Merrill Lynch and Jack Grubman of Salomon
Smith Barney wrote glowing research reports of companies they knew
to be junk. Sam Waksal dumped his ImClone stock when he got early
word of a damaging report from the Food and Drug Administration;
his friend Martha Stewart also dumped her shares, then lied about the
reason. WorldCom and Global Crossing fabricated billions of dollars
in revenues to pump up their stock prices. One group of mutual fund
companies let preferred customers trade at preferred prices, and another
group was charged with hiding management fees.
Though extraordinarily diverse, these crimes all have a common
trait: they were sins of information. Most of them involved an expert,
or a gang of experts, promoting false information or hiding true information;
in each case the experts were trying to keep the information
asymmetry as asymmetrical as possible.
62
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
The practitioners of such acts, especially in the realm of high finance,
inevitably offer this defense: Everybody else was doing it.
Which may be largely true. One characteristic of information crimes
is that very few of them are detected. Unlike street crimes, they do not
leave behind a corpse or a broken window. Unlike a bagel criminal
that is, someone who eats one of Paul Feldmans bagels but doesnt
payan information criminal typically doesnt have someone like
Feldman tallying every nickel. For an information crime to reach the
surface, something drastic must happen. When it does, the results
tend to be pretty revealing. The perpetrators, after all, werent thinking
about their private actions being made public. Consider the
Enron tapes, the secretly recorded conversations of Enron employees
that surfaced after the company imploded. During a phone conversation
on August 5, 2000, two traders chatted about how a wildfire
in California would allow Enron to jack up its electricity prices. The
magical word of the day, one trader said, is Burn, Baby, Burn.  A
few months later, a pair of Enron traders named Kevin and Bob
talked about how California officials wanted to make Enron refund
the profits of its price gouging.
KEVIN: Theyre fucking taking all the money back from you
guys? All the money you guys stole from those poor grandmas
in California?
BOB: Yeah, Grandma Millie, man.
KEVIN: Yeah, now she wants her fucking money back for all the
power you jammed right up her ass for fucking $250 a megawatt
hour.
If you were to assume that many experts use their information to
your detriment, youd be right. Experts depend on the fact that you
dont have the information they do. Or that you are so befuddled by
63
FREAKONOMICS
the complexity of their operation that you wouldnt know what to do
with the information if you had it. Or that you are so in awe of their
expertise that you wouldnt dare challenge them. If your doctor suggests
that you have angioplastyeven though some current research
suggests that angioplasty often does little to prevent heart attacks
you arent likely to think that the doctor is using his informational advantage
to make a few thousand dollars for himself or his buddy. But
as David Hillis, an interventional cardiologist at the University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas, explained to the New
York Times, a doctor may have the same economic incentives as a car
salesman or a funeral director or a mutual fund manager: If youre an
invasive cardiologist and Joe Smith, the local internist, is sending you
patients, and if you tell them they dont need the procedure, pretty
soon Joe Smith doesnt send patients anymore.
Armed with information, experts can exert a gigantic, if unspoken,
leverage: fear. Fear that your children will find you dead on the bathroom
floor of a heart attack if you do not have angioplasty surgery.
Fear that a cheap casket will expose your grandmother to a terrible
underground fate. Fear that a $25,000 car will crumple like a toy in
an accident, whereas a $50,000 car will wrap your loved ones in a
cocoon of impregnable steel. The fear created by commercial experts
may not quite rival the fear created by terrorists like the Ku Klux
Klan, but the principle is the same.
Consider a transaction that wouldnt seem, on the surface, to create
much fear: selling your house. Whats so scary about that? Aside from
the fact that selling a house is typically the largest financial transaction
in your life, and that you probably have scant experience in real estate,
and that you may have an enormous emotional attachment to your
house, there are at least two pressing fears: that you will sell the house
for far less than it is worth and that you will not be able to sell it at all.
In the first case, you fear setting the price too low; in the second,
64
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
you fear setting it too high. It is the job of your real-estate agent, of
course, to find the golden mean. She is the one with all the information:
the inventory of similar houses, the recent sales trends, the
tremors of the mortgage market, perhaps even a lead on an interested
buyer. You feel fortunate to have such a knowledgeable expert as an
ally in this most confounding enterprise.
Too bad she sees things differently. A real-estate agent may see you
not so much as an ally but as a mark. Think back to the study cited at
the beginning of this book, which measured the difference between
the sale prices of homes that belonged to real-estate agents themselves
and the houses they sold for their clients. The study found that an
agent keeps her own house on the market an average ten extra days,
waiting for a better offer, and sells it for over 3 percent more than your
houseor $10,000 on the sale of a $300,000 house. Thats $10,000
going into her pocket that does not go into yours, a nifty profit produced
by the abuse of information and a keen understanding of incentives.
The problem is that the agent only stands to personally gain
an additional $150 by selling your house for $10,000 more, which
isnt much reward for a lot of extra work. So her job is to convince you
that a $300,000 offer is in fact a very good offer, even a generous one,
and that only a fool would refuse it.
This can be tricky. The agent does not want to come right out and
call you a fool. So she merely implies itperhaps by telling you about
the much bigger, nicer, newer house down the block that has sat unsold
for six months. Here is the agents main weapon: the conversion
of information into fear. Consider this true story, related by John
Donohue, a law professor who in 2001 was teaching at Stanford University:
I was just about to buy a house on the Stanford campus, he
recalls, and the sellers agent kept telling me what a good deal I was
getting because the market was about to zoom. As soon as I signed the
purchase contract, he asked me if I would need an agent to sell my
65
FREAKONOMICS
previous Stanford house. I told him that I would probably try to sell
without an agent, and he replied, John, that might work under normal
conditions, but with the market tanking now, you really need the
help of a broker. 
Within five minutes, a zooming market had tanked. Such are
the marvels that can be conjured by an agent in search of the next
deal.
Consider now another true story of a real-estate agents information
abuse. The tale involves K., a close friend of one of this books authors.
K. wanted to buy a house that was listed at $469,000. He was
prepared to offer $450,000 but he first called the sellers agent and
asked her to name the lowest price that she thought the homeowner
might accept. The agent promptly scolded K. You ought to be
ashamed of yourself, she said. That is clearly a violation of realestate
ethics.
K. apologized. The conversation turned to other, more mundane
issues. After ten minutes, as the conversation was ending, the agent
told K., Let me say one last thing. My client is willing to sell this
house for a lot less than you might think.
Based on this conversation, K. then offered $425,000 for the
house instead of the $450,000 he had planned to offer. In the end, the
seller accepted $430,000. Thanks to his own agents intervention,
the seller lost at least $20,000. The agent, meanwhile, only lost
$300a small price to pay to ensure that she would quickly and easily
lock up the sale, which netted her a commission of $6,450.
So a big part of a real-estate agents job, it would seem, is to persuade
the homeowner to sell for less than he would like while at the
same time letting potential buyers know that a house can be bought
for less than its listing price. To be sure, there are more subtle means of
doing so than coming right out and telling the buyer to bid low. The
study of real-estate agents cited above also includes data that reveals
how agents convey information through the for-sale ads they write. A
66
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
phrase like well maintained, for instance, is as full of meaning to an
agent as Mr. Ayak was to a Klansman; it means that a house is old
but not quite falling down. A savvy buyer will know this (or find out
for himself once he sees the house), but to the sixty-five-year-old retiree
who is selling his house, well maintained might sound like a
compliment, which is just what the agent intends.
An analysis of the language used in real-estate ads shows that
certain words are powerfully correlated with the final sale price of
a house. This doesnt necessarily mean that labeling a house well
maintained causes it to sell for less than an equivalent house. It does,
however, indicate that when a real-estate agent labels a house well
maintained, she may be subtly encouraging a buyer to bid low.
Listed below are ten terms commonly used in real-estate ads. Five
of them have a strong positive correlation to the ultimate sale price,
and five have a strong negative correlation. Guess which are which.
Ten Common Real-Estate Ad Terms
Fantastic
Granite
Spacious
State-of-the-Art
!
Corian
Charming
Maple
Great Neighborhood
Gourmet
A fantastic house is surely fantastic enough to warrant a high
price, isnt it? What about a charming and spacious house in a
great neighborhood!? No, no, no, and no. Heres the breakdown:
67
FREAK ONOMIC S
Five Terms Correlated to a Higher Sale Price
Granite
State-of-the-Art
Corian
Maple
Gourmet
Five Terms Correlated to a Lower Sale Price
Fantastic
Spacious
!
Charming
Great Neighborhood
Three of the five terms correlated with a higher sale price are physical
descriptions of the house itself: granite, Corian, and maple. As information
goes, such terms are specific and straightforwardand
therefore pretty useful. If you like granite, you might like the house;
but even if you dont, granite certainly doesnt connote a fixerupper.
Nor does gourmet or state-of-the-art, both of which seem
to tell a buyer that a house is, on some level, truly fantastic.
Fantastic, meanwhile, is a dangerously ambiguous adjective, as is
charming. Both these words seem to be real-estate agent code for a
house that doesnt have many specific attributes worth describing.
Spacious homes, meanwhile, are often decrepit or impractical.
Great neighborhood signals a buyer that, well, this house isnt very
nice but others nearby may be. And an exclamation point in a realestate
ad is bad news for sure, a bid to paper over real shortcomings
with false enthusiasm.
68
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
If you study the words in ads for a real-estate agents own home,
meanwhile, you see that she indeed emphasizes descriptive terms
(especially new, granite, maple, and move-in condition) and
avoids empty adjectives (including wonderful, immaculate, and
the telltale !). Then she patiently waits for the best buyer to come
along. She might tell this buyer about a house nearby that just sold for
$25,000 above the asking price, or another house that is currently the
subject of a bidding war. She is careful to exercise every advantage of
the information asymmetry she enjoys.
Does this make her a bad person? Thats hard to say, at least hard
for us to say. The point here is not that real-estate agents are bad people,
but that they simply are peopleand people inevitably respond
to incentives. The incentives of the real-estate business, as currently
configured, plainly encourage some agents to act against the best interests
of their customers.
But like the funeral director and the car salesman and the lifeinsurance
company, the real-estate agent has also seen her advantage
eroded by the Internet. After all, anyone selling a home can now get
online and gather her own information about sales trends and housing
inventory and mortgage rates. The information has been set loose.
And recent sales data show the results. Real-estate agents still get a
higher price for their own homes than comparable homes owned by
their clients, but since the proliferation of real-estate websites, the gap
between the two prices has shrunk by a third.
It would be nave to suppose that people abuse information only
when they are acting as experts or as agents of commerce. After all,
agents and experts are people toowhich suggests that we are likely
to abuse information in our personal lives as well, whether by withholding
true information or editing the information we choose to put
69
FREAKONOMICS
forth. A real-estate agent may wink and nod when she lists a wellmaintained
house, but we each have our equivalent hedges.
Think about how you describe yourself during a job interview versus
how you might describe yourself on a first date. (For even more
fun, compare that first-date conversation to a conversation with the
same person during your tenth year of marriage.) Or think about how
you might present yourself if you were going on national television
for the first time. What sort of image would you want to project? Perhaps
you want to seem clever or kind or good-looking; presumably
you dont want to come off as cruel or bigoted. During the heyday of
the Ku Klux Klan, its members took pride in publicly disparaging
anybody who wasnt a conservative white Christian. But public bigotry
has since been vastly curtailed. Even subtle displays of bigotry, if
they become public, are now costly. Trent Lott, the majority leader of
the U.S. Senate, learned this in 2002 after making a toast at a one
hundredth birthday party for Strom Thurmond, his fellow senator
and fellow southerner. Lott made a reference in his toast to Thurmonds
1948 campaign for president, which was built on a platform
of segregation; MississippiLotts home statewas one of just four
states that Thurmond carried. Were proud of it, Lott told the partygoers.
And if the rest of the country had followed our lead, we
wouldnt have had all these problems over all these years either. The
implication that Lott was a fan of segregation raised enough of a fury
that he was forced to quit his Senate leadership post.
Even if you are a private citizen, you surely wouldnt want to seem bigoted
while appearing in public. Might there be a way to test for discrimination
in a public setting?
Unlikely as it may seem, the television game show The Weakest
Link provides a unique laboratory to study discrimination. An import
70
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
from the United Kingdom, The Weakest Link for a short time became
wildly popular in the United States. The game includes eight contestants
(or, in a later daytime version, six) who each answer trivia questions
and compete for a single cash jackpot. But the player who
answers the most questions correctly isnt necessarily the player who
advances. After each round, every contestant votes to eliminate one
other contestant. A players trivia-answering ability is presumably the
only worthwhile factor to consider; race, gender, and age wouldnt
seem to matter. But do they? By measuring a contestants actual votes
against the votes that would truly best serve his self-interest, its possible
to tell if discrimination is at play.
The voting strategy changes as the game progresses. In the first several
rounds, it makes sense to eliminate bad players since the jackpot
grows only when correct answers are given. In later rounds, the strategic
incentives are flipped. The value of building the jackpot is now
outweighed by each contestants desire to win the jackpot. Its easier to
do that if you eliminate the other good players. So, roughly speaking,
the typical contestant will vote to eliminate the worse players in the
early rounds and the better players in the later rounds.
The key to measuring the Weakest Link voting data is to tease out a
contestants playing ability from his race, gender, and age. If a young
black man answers a lot of questions correctly but is voted off early,
discrimination would seem to be a factor. Meanwhile, if an elderly
white woman doesnt answer a single question correctly and is still not
voted off, some sort of discriminatory favoritism would seem to be at
play.
Again, keep in mind that all of this is happening on camera. A contestant
knows that his friends, family, and co-workersalong with a
few million strangersare watching. So who, if anyone, is discriminated
against on The Weakest Link?
Not, as it turns out, blacks. An analysis of more than 160 episodes
7 1
FREAKONOMICS
reveals that black contestants, in both the early and late rounds of
the game, are eliminated at a rate commensurate with their triviaanswering
abilities. The same is true for female contestants. In a way,
neither of these findings is so surprising. Two of the most potent social
campaigns of the past half-century were the civil rights movement
and the feminist movement, which demonized discrimination against
blacks and women, respectively.
So perhaps, you say hopefully, discrimination was practically eradicated
during the twentieth century, like polio.
Or more likely, it has become so unfashionable to discriminate
against certain groups that all but the most insensitive people take
pains to at least appear fair-minded, at least in public. This hardly
means that discrimination itself has endedonly that people are embarrassed
to show it. How might you determine whether the lack of
discrimination against blacks and women represents a true absence or
just a charade? The answer can be found by looking at other groups
that society doesnt protect as well. Indeed, the Weakest Link voting
data do indicate two kinds of contestants who are consistently discriminated
against: the elderly and Latinos.
Among economists, there are two leading theories of discrimination.
Interestingly, elderly Weakest Link contestants seem to suffer
from one type, while Latinos suffer the other. The first type is called
taste-based discrimination, which means that one person discriminates
simply because he prefers to not interact with a particular type
of other person. In the second type, known as information-based discrimination,
one person believes that another type of person has poor
skills, and acts accordingly.
On The Weakest Link, Latinos suffer information-based discrimination.
Other contestants seem to view the Latinos as poor players,
even when they are not. This perception translates into Latinos being
eliminated in the early rounds even if they are doing well and not
72
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
being eliminated in the later rounds, when other contestants want to
keep the Latinos around to weaken the field.
Elderly players, meanwhile, are victims of taste-based discrimination:
in the early rounds and late rounds, they are eliminated far out
of proportion to their skills. It seems as if the other contestantsthis
is a show on which the average age is thirty-foursimply dont want
the older players around.
Its quite possible that a typical Weakest Link contestant isnt even
cognizant of his discrimination toward Latinos and the elderly (or, in
the case of blacks and women, his lack of discrimination). He is
bound to be nervous, after all, and excited, playing a fast-moving
game under the glare of television lights. Which naturally suggests another
question: how might that same person express his preferences
and reveal information about himselfin the privacy of his home?
In a given year, some forty million Americans swap intimate
truths about themselves with complete strangers. It all happens on Internet
dating sites. Some of them, like Match.com, eHarmony.com,
and Yahoo! Personals, appeal to a broad audience. Others cater to
more specific tastes: ChristianSingles.com, JDate.com, LatinMatcher
.com, BlackSinglesConnection.com, CountryWesternSingles.com,
USMilitarySingles.com, OverweightDate.com, and Gay.com. Dating
websites are the most successful subscription-based business on
the Internet.
Each site operates a bit differently, but the gist is this: You compose
a personal ad about yourself that typically includes a photo, vital
statistics, your income range, level of education, likes and dislikes, and
so on. If the ad catches someones fancy, that someone will e-mail you
and perhaps arrange a date. On many sites, you also specify your dating
aims: long-term relationship, a casual lover, or just looking.
73
FREAKONOMICS
So there are two massive layers of data to be mined here: the information
that people include in their ads and the level of response
gleaned by any particular ad. Each layer of the data can be asked its
own question. In the case of the ads, how forthright (and honest) are
people when it comes to sharing their personal information? And in
the case of the responses, what kind of information in personal ads is
considered the most (and least) desirable?
Two economists and a psychologist recently banded together to
address these questions. Gnter J. Hitsch, Ali Hortasu, and Dan
Ariely analyzed the data from one of the mainstream dating sites, focusing
on more than 20,000 active users, half in Boston and half in
San Diego. Fifty-six percent of the users were men, and the median
age range for all users was twenty-one to thirty-five. Although they
represented an adequate racial mix to reach some conclusions about
race, they were predominantly white.
They were also a lot richer, taller, skinnier, and better-looking
than average. That, at least, is what they wrote about themselves.
More than 4 percent of the online daters claimed to earn more than
$200,000 a year, whereas fewer than 1 percent of typical Internet
users actually earn that much, suggesting that three of the four big
earners were exaggerating. Male and female users typically reported
that they are about an inch taller than the national average. As for
weight, the men were in line with the national average, but the
women typically said they weighed about twenty pounds less than the
national average.
Most impressively, fully 72 percent of the women claimed above
average looks, including 24 percent claiming very good looks. The
online men too were gorgeous: 68 percent called themselves above
average, including 19 percent with very good looks. This leaves
only about 30 percent of the users with average looks, including a
paltry 1 percent with less than average lookswhich suggests that
74
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
the typical online dater is either a fabulist, a narcissist, or simply resistant
to the meaning of average. (Or perhaps they are all just pragmatists:
as any real-estate agent knows, the typical house isnt
charming or fantastic, but unless you say it is, no one will even
bother to take a look.) Twenty-eight percent of the women on the site
said they were blond, a number far beyond the national average,
which indicates a lot of dyeing, or lying, or both.
Some users, meanwhile, were bracingly honest. Seven percent of
the men conceded that they were married, with a significant minority
of these men reporting that they were happily married. But the fact
that they were honest doesnt mean they were rash. Of the 243 happily
married men in the sample, only 12 chose to post a picture of
themselves. The reward of gaining a mistress was evidently outweighed
by the risk of having your wife discover your personal ad.
(And what were you doing on that website? the husband might bluster,
undoubtedly to little avail.)
Of the many ways to fail on a dating website, not posting a photo
of yourself is perhaps the most certain. (Not that the photo necessarily
is a photo of yourself; it may well be some better-looking stranger, but
such deception would obviously backfire in time.) A man who does
not include his photo gets only 60 percent of the volume of e-mail response
of a man who does; a woman who doesnt include her photo
gets only 24 percent as much. A low-income, poorly educated, unhappily
employed, not very attractive, slightly overweight, and balding
man who posts his photo stands a better chance of gleaning some
e-mails than a man who says he makes $200,000 and is deadly handsome
but doesnt post a photo. There are plenty of reasons someone
might not post a photohes technically challenged or is ashamed of
being spotted by friends or is just plain unattractivebut as in the
case of a brand-new car with a For Sale sign, prospective customers
will assume hes got something seriously wrong under the hood.
75
FREAKONOMICS
Getting a date is hard enough as it is. Fifty-six percent of the men
who post ads dont receive even one e-mail; 21 percent of the women
dont get a single response. The traits that do draw a big response,
meanwhile, will not be a big surprise to anyone with even a passing
knowledge of the sexes. In fact, the preferences expressed by online
daters fit snugly with the most common stereotypes about men and
women.
For instance, men who say they want a long-term relationship do
much better than men looking for an occasional lover. But women
looking for an occasional lover do great. For men, a womans looks are
of paramount importance. For women, a mans income is terribly
important. The richer a man is, the more e-mails he receives. But a
womans income appeal is a bell-shaped curve: men do not want to
date low-earning women, but once a woman starts earning too much,
they seem to be scared off. Women are eager to date military men, policemen,
and firemen (possibly the result of a 9/11 Effect, like the
higher payments to Paul Feldmans bagel business), along with
lawyers and doctors; they generally avoid men with manufacturing
jobs. For men, being short is a big disadvantage (which is probably
why so many lie about it), but weight doesnt much matter. For
women, being overweight is deadly (which is probably why they lie).
For a man, having red hair or curly hair is a downer, as is bald with a
fringebut a shaved head is okay. For a woman, salt-and-pepper
hair is bad, while blond hair is, not surprisingly, very good.
In addition to all the information about income, education, and
looks, men and women on the dating site listed their race. They were
also asked to indicate a preference regarding the race of their potential
dates. The two preferences were the same as mine or it doesnt matter.
Like the Weakest Link contestants, the website users were now
publicly declaring how they felt about people who didnt look like
them. They would reveal their actual preferences later, in confidential
e-mails to the people they wanted to date.
76
Th e Ku Kl u x Kl a n a n d Re a l - E s t a te Ag e n t s
Roughly half of the white women on the site and 80 percent of the
white men declared that race didnt matter to them. But the response
data tell a different story. The white men who said that race didnt
matter sent 90 percent of their e-mail queries to white women. The
white women who said race didnt matter sent about 97 percent of
their e-mail queries to white men. This means that an Asian man who
is good-looking, rich, and well educated will receive fewer than 25
percent as many e-mails from white women as a white man with the
same qualifications would receive; similarly, black and Latino men receive
about half as many e-mails from white women as they would if
they were white.
Is it possible that race really didnt matter for these white women
and men and that they simply never happened to browse a nonwhite
date that interested them? Or, more likely, did they say that race didnt
matter because they wanted to come acrossespecially to potential
mates of their own raceas open-minded?
The gulf between the information we publicly proclaim and the information
we know to be true is often vast. (Or, put a more familiar
way: we say one thing and do another.) This can be seen in personal
relationships, in commercial transactions, and of course in politics.
By now we are fully accustomed to the false public proclamations
of politicians themselves. But voters lie too. Consider an election between
a black candidate and a white candidate. Might white voters lie
to pollsters, claiming they will vote for the black candidate in order to
appear more color-blind than they actually are? Apparently so. In
New York Citys 1989 mayoral race between David Dinkins (a black
candidate) and Rudolph Giuliani (who is white), Dinkins won by
only a few points. Although Dinkins became the citys first black
mayor, his slender margin of victory came as a surprise, for preelection
polls showed Dinkins winning by nearly 15 points. When
77
FREAKONOMICS
the white supremacist David Duke ran for the U.S. Senate in 1990,
he garnered nearly 20 percent more of the vote than pre-election polls
had projected, an indication that thousands of Louisiana voters did
not want to admit their preference for a candidate with racist views.
Duke, though he never won the high political office he often
sought, proved himself a master of information abuse. As Grand Wizard
of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, he was able to compile a mailing
list of thousands of rank-and-file Klansmen and other supporters
who would eventually become his political base. Not content to use
the list only for himself, he sold it for $150,000 to the governor of
Louisiana. Years later, Duke would once again use the list himself, letting
his supporters know that hed fallen on hard times and needed
their donations. In this way Duke was able to raise hundreds of thousands
of dollars for his continuing work in the field of white supremacy.
He had explained to his supporters in a letter that he was so
broke that the bank was trying to repossess his house.
In truth, Duke had already sold his house for a solid profit. (It isnt
known whether he used a real-estate agent.) And most of the money
he raised from his supporters was being used not to promote any
white supremacist cause but rather to satisfy Dukes gambling habit.
It was a sweet little scam he was runninguntil he was arrested and
sent to federal prison in Big Spring, Texas.
78
3 Why Do Drug Dealers Still
Live with Their Moms?
The two previous chapters were built around a pair of admittedly
freakish questions: What do schoolteachers and sumo wrestlers have in
common? and How is the Ku Klux Klan like a group of real-estate agents?
But if you ask enough questions, strange as they seem at the time, you
may eventually learn something worthwhile.
The first trick of asking questions is to determine if your question
is a good one. Just because a question has never been asked does not
make it good. Smart people have been asking questions for quite a few
centuries now, so many of the questions that havent been asked are
bound to yield uninteresting answers.
But if you can question something that people really care about
and find an answer that may surprise themthat is, if you can overturn
the conventional wisdomthen you may have some luck.
It was John Kenneth Galbraith, the hyperliterate economic sage,
who coined the phrase conventional wisdom. He did not consider
it a compliment. We associate truth with convenience, he wrote,
FREAKONOMICS
with what most closely accords with self-interest and personal
well-being or promises best to avoid awkward effort or unwelcome
dislocation of life. We also find highly acceptable what contributes
most to self-esteem. Economic and social behaviors, Galbraith continued,
are complex, and to comprehend their character is mentally
tiring. Therefore we adhere, as though to a raft, to those ideas which
represent our understanding.
So the conventional wisdom in Galbraiths view must be simple,
convenient, comfortable, and comfortingthough not necessarily
true. It would be silly to argue that the conventional wisdom is never
true. But noticing where the conventional wisdom may be false
noticing, perhaps, the contrails of sloppy or self-interested thinking
is a nice place to start asking questions.
Consider the recent history of homelessness in the United States.
In the early 1980s, an advocate for the homeless named Mitch Snyder
took to saying that there were about 3 million homeless Americans.
The public duly sat up and took notice. More than 1 of every 100
people were homeless? That sure seemed high, but . . . well, the expert
said it. A heretofore quiescent problem was suddenly catapulted
into the national consciousness. Snyder even testified before Congress
about the magnitude of the problem. He also reportedly told a college
audience that 45 homeless people die each secondwhich would
mean a whopping 1.4 billion dead homeless every year. (The U.S.
population at the time was about 225 million.) Assuming that Snyder
misspoke or was misquoted and meant to say that one homeless person
died every forty-five seconds, thats still 701,000 dead homeless
people every yearroughly one-third of all deaths in the United
States. Hmm. Ultimately, when Snyder was pressed on his figure of 3
million homeless, he admitted that it was a fabrication. Journalists
had been hounding him for a specific number, he said, and he hadnt
wanted them to walk away empty-handed.
80
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
It may be sad but not surprising to learn that experts like Snyder
can be self-interested to the point of deceit. But they cannot deceive
on their own. Journalists need experts as badly as experts need journalists.
Every day there are newspaper pages and television newscasts
to be filled, and an expert who can deliver a jarring piece of wisdom is
always welcome. Working together, journalists and experts are the
architects of much conventional wisdom.
Advertising too is a brilliant tool for creating conventional wisdom.
Listerine, for instance, was invented in the nineteenth century
as a powerful surgical antiseptic. It was later sold, in distilled form, as
a floor cleaner and a cure for gonorrhea. But it wasnt a runaway success
until the 1920s, when it was pitched as a solution for chronic
halitosisa then obscure medical term for bad breath. Listerines
new ads featured forlorn young women and men, eager for marriage
but turned off by their mates rotten breath. Can I be happy with
him in spite of that? one maiden asked herself. Until that time, bad
breath was not conventionally considered such a catastrophe. But Listerine
changed that. As the advertising scholar James B. Twitchell
writes, Listerine did not make mouthwash as much as it made halitosis.
In just seven years, the companys revenues rose from $115,000
to more than $8 million.
However created, the conventional wisdom can be hard to budge.
The economist Paul Krugman, a New York Times columnist and devout
critic of George W. Bush, bemoaned this fact as the Presidents
reelection campaign got under way in early 2004: The approved
story line about Mr. Bush is that hes a bluff, honest, plainspoken guy,
and anecdotes that fit that story get reported. But if the conventional
wisdom were instead that hes a phony, a silver-spoon baby who pretends
to be a cowboy, journalists would have plenty of material to
work with.
In the months leading up to the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003,
8 1
FREAKONOMICS
dueling experts floated diametrically opposite forecasts about Iraqs
weapons of mass destruction. But more often, as with Mitch Snyders
homeless statistics, one side wins the war of conventional wisdom.
Womens rights advocates, for instance, have hyped the incidence of
sexual assault, claiming that one in three American women will in her
lifetime be a victim of rape or attempted rape. (The actual figure is
more like one in eightbut the advocates know it would take a
callous person to publicly dispute their claims.) Advocates working
for the cures of various tragic diseases regularly do the same. Why not?
A little creative lying can draw attention, indignation, andperhaps
most importantthe money and political capital to address the actual
problem.
Of course an expert, whether a womens health advocate or a political
advisor or an advertising executive, tends to have different incentives
than the rest of us. And an experts incentives may shift 180
degrees, depending on the situation.
Consider the police. A recent audit discovered that the police in
Atlanta were radically underreporting crime since the early 1990s.
The practice apparently began when Atlanta was working to land the
1996 Olympics. The city needed to shed its violent image, and fast.
So each year thousands of crime reports were either downgraded from
violent to nonviolent or simply thrown away. (Despite these continuing
effortsthere were more than 22,000 missing police reports in
2002 aloneAtlanta regularly ranks among the most violent American
cities.)
Police in other cities, meanwhile, were spinning a different story
during the 1990s. The sudden, violent appearance of crack cocaine
had police departments across the country scrapping for resources.
They made it known that it wasnt a fair fight: the drug dealers were
armed with state-of-the-art weapons and a bottomless supply of
cash. This emphasis on illicit cash proved to be a winning effort, for
82
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
nothing infuriated the law-abiding populace more than the image of
the millionaire crack dealer. The media eagerly glommed on to this
story, portraying crack dealing as one of the most profitable jobs in
America.
But if you were to have spent a little time around the housing projects
where crack was so often sold, you might have noticed something
strange: not only did most of the crack dealers still live in the projects,
but most of them still lived at home with their moms. And then you
may have scratched your head and said, Why is that?
The answer lies in finding the right data, and the secret to finding
the right data usually means finding the right personwhich is more
easily said than done. Drug dealers are rarely trained in economics,
and economists rarely hang out with crack dealers. So the answer to
this question begins with finding someone who did live among the
drug dealers and managed to walk away with the secrets of their trade.
Sudhir Venkateshhis boyhood friends called him Sid, but he has
since reverted to Sudhirwas born in India, raised in the suburbs of
upstate New York and southern California, and graduated from the
University of California at San Diego with a degree in mathematics.
In 1989 he began to pursue his PhD in sociology at the University of
Chicago. He was interested in understanding how young people form
their identities; to that end, he had just spent three months following
the Grateful Dead around the country. What he was not interested in
was the grueling fieldwork that typifies sociology.
But his graduate advisor, the eminent poverty scholar William
Julius Wilson, promptly sent Venkatesh into the field. His assignment:
to visit Chicagos poorest black neighborhoods with a clipboard
and a seventy-question, multiple-choice survey. This was the first
question on the survey:
83
FREAKONOMICS
How do you feel about being black and poor?
a. Very bad
b. Bad
c. Neither bad nor good
d. Somewhat good
e. Very good
One day Venkatesh walked twenty blocks from the university to
a housing project on the shore of Lake Michigan to administer his
survey. The project comprised three sixteen-story buildings made of
yellow-gray brick. Venkatesh soon discovered that the names and addresses
he had been given were badly outdated. These buildings were
condemned, practically abandoned. Some families lived on the lower
floors, pirating water and electricity, but the elevators didnt work.
Neither did the lights in the stairwell. It was late afternoon in early
winter, nearly dark outside.
Venkatesh, who is a thoughtful, handsome, and well-built but not
aberrationally brave person, had made his way up to the sixth floor,
trying to find someone willing to take his survey. Suddenly, on the
stairwell landing, he startled a group of teenagers shooting dice. They
turned out to be a gang of junior-level crack dealers who operated out
of the building, and they were not happy to see him.
Im a student at the University of Chicago, Venkatesh sputtered,
sticking to his survey script, and I am administering
Fuck you, nigger, what are you doing in our stairwell?
There was an ongoing gang war in Chicago. Things had been violent
lately, with shootings nearly every day. This gang, a branch of
the Black Gangster Disciple Nation, was plainly on edge. They didnt
know what to make of Venkatesh. He didnt seem to be a member of a
rival gang. But maybe he was some kind of spy? He certainly wasnt a
84
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
cop. He wasnt black, wasnt white. He wasnt exactly threateninghe
was armed only with his clipboardbut he didnt seem quite harmless
either. Thanks to his three months trailing the Grateful Dead, he
still looked, as he would later put it, like a genuine freak, with hair
down to my ass.
The gang members started arguing over what should be done with
Venkatesh. Let him go? But if he did tell the rival gang about this
stairwell hangout, theyd be susceptible to a surprise attack. One
jittery kid kept wagging something back and forth in his handsin
the dimming light, Venkatesh eventually realized it was a gunand
muttering, Let me have him, let me have him. Venkatesh was very,
very scared.
The crowd grew bigger and louder. Then an older gang member
appeared. He snatched the clipboard from Venkateshs hands and,
when he saw that it was a written questionnaire, looked puzzled.
I cant read any of this shit, he said.
Thats because you cant read, said one of the teenagers, and
everyone laughed at the older gangster.
He told Venkatesh to go ahead and ask him a question from the
survey. Venkatesh led with the how-does-it-feel-to-be-black-andpoor
question. It was met with a round of guffaws, some angrier than
others. As Venkatesh would later tell his university colleagues, he realized
that the multiple-choice answers A through E were insufficient.
In reality, he now knew, the answers should have looked like this:
a. Very bad
b. Bad
c. Neither bad nor good
d. Somewhat good
e. Very good
f. Fuck you
85
FREAKONOMICS
Just as things were looking their bleakest for Venkatesh, another
man appeared. This was J. T., the gangs leader. J. T. wanted to know
what was going on. Then he told Venkatesh to read him the survey
question. He listened but then said he couldnt answer the question
because he wasnt black.
Well then, Venkatesh said, how does it feel to be African American
and poor?
I aint no African American either, you idiot. Im a nigger. J. T.
then administered a lively though not unfriendly taxonomical lesson
in nigger versus African American versus black. When he was
through, there was an awkward silence. Still nobody seemed to know
what to do with Venkatesh. J. T., who was in his late twenties, had
cooled down his subordinates, but he didnt seem to want to interfere
directly with their catch. Darkness fell and J. T. left. People dont
come out of here alive, the jittery teenager with the gun told
Venkatesh. You know that, dont you?
As night deepened, his captors eased up. They gave Venkatesh one
of their beers, and then another and another. When he had to pee, he
went where they wenton the stairwell landing one floor up. J. T.
stopped by a few times during the night but didnt have much to say.
Daybreak came and then noon. Venkatesh would occasionally try to
discuss his survey, but the young crack dealers just laughed and told
him how stupid his questions were. Finally, nearly twenty-four hours
after Venkatesh stumbled upon them, they set him free.
He went home and took a shower. He was relieved but he was also
curious. It struck Venkatesh that most people, including himself, had
never given much thought to the daily life of ghetto criminals. He
was now eager to learn how the Black Disciples worked, from top to
bottom.
After a few hours, he decided to walk back to the housing project.
By now he had thought of some better questions to ask.
86
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
Having seen firsthand that the conventional method of data
gathering was in this case absurd, Venkatesh vowed to scrap his questionnaire
and embed himself with the gang. He tracked down J. T.
and sketched out his proposal. J. T. thought Venkatesh was crazy,
literallya university student wanting to cozy up to a crack gang?
But he also admired what Venkatesh was after. As it happened, J. T.
was a college graduate himself, a business major. After college, he had
taken a job in the Loop, working in the marketing department of a
company that sold office equipment. But he felt so out of place
therelike a white man working at Afro Sheen headquarters, he liked
to saythat he quit. Still, he never forgot what he learned. He knew
the importance of collecting data and finding new markets; he was always
on the lookout for better management strategies. It was no coincidence,
in other words, that J. T. was the leader of this crack gang. He
was bred to be a boss.
After some wrangling, J. T. promised Venkatesh unfettered access
to the gangs operations as long as J. T. retained veto power over any
information that, if published, might prove harmful.
When the yellow-gray buildings on the lakefront were demolished,
shortly after Venkateshs first visit, the gang relocated to another
housing project even deeper in Chicagos south side. For the
next six years, Venkatesh practically lived there. Under J. T.s protection
he watched the gang members up close, at work and at home. He
asked endless questions. Sometimes the gangsters were annoyed by
his curiosity; more often they took advantage of his willingness to listen.
Its a war out here, man, one dealer told him. I mean, every
day people struggling to survive, so you know, we just do what we
can. We aint got no choice, and if that means getting killed, well, shit,
its what niggers do around here to feed their family.
Venkatesh would move from one family to the next, washing their
dinner dishes and sleeping on the floor. He bought toys for their
87
FREAKONOMICS
children; he once watched a woman use her babys bib to sop up the
blood of a teenaged drug dealer who was shot to death in front of
Venkatesh. William Julius Wilson, back at the U. of C., was having
regular nightmares on Venkateshs behalf.
Over the years the gang endured bloody turf wars and, eventually,
a federal indictment. A member named Booty, who was one rank beneath
J. T., came to Venkatesh with a story. Booty was being blamed
by the rest of the gang for bringing about the indictment, he told
Venkatesh, and therefore suspected that he would soon be killed. (He
was right.) But first Booty wanted to do a little atoning. For all the
gangs talk about how crack dealing didnt do any harmthey even
liked to brag that it kept black money in the black community
Booty was feeling guilty. He wanted to leave behind something that
might somehow benefit the next generation. He handed Venkatesh a
stack of well-worn spiral notebooksblue and black, the gangs colors.
They represented a complete record of four years worth of the
gangs financial transactions. At J. T.s direction, the ledgers had been
rigorously compiled: sales, wages, dues, even the death benefits paid
out to the families of murdered members.
At first Venkatesh didnt even want the notebooks. What if the
Feds found out he had themperhaps hed be indicted too? Besides,
what was he supposed to do with the data? Despite his math background,
he had long ago stopped thinking in numbers.
Upon completing his graduate work at the University of Chicago,
Venkatesh was awarded a three-year stay at Harvards Society of Fellows.
Its environment of sharp thinking and bonhomiethe walnut
paneling, the sherry cart once owned by Oliver Wendell Holmes
delighted Venkatesh. He went so far as to become the societys wine
steward. And yet he regularly left Cambridge, returning again and
again to the crack gang in Chicago. This street-level research made
88
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
Venkatesh something of an anomaly. Most of the other young Fellows
were dyed-in-the-tweed intellectuals who liked to pun in Greek.
One of the societys aims was to bring together scholars from various
fields who might not otherwise have occasion to meet. Venkatesh
soon encountered another anomalous young Fellow, one who also
failed the society stereotype. This one happened to be an economist
who, instead of thinking grand macro thoughts, favored his own list
of offbeat micro curiosities. At the very top of his list was crime. And
so, within ten minutes of their meeting, Sudhir Venkatesh told Steven
Levitt about the spiral notebooks from Chicago and they decided to
collaborate on a paper. It would be the first time that such priceless financial
data had fallen into an economists hands, affording an analysis
of a heretofore uncharted criminal enterprise.
So how did the gang work? An awful lot like most American businesses,
actually, though perhaps none more so than McDonalds. In
fact, if you were to hold a McDonalds organizational chart and a
Black Disciples org chart side by side, you could hardly tell the difference.
The gang that Venkatesh had fallen in with was one of about a
hundred branchesfranchises, reallyof a larger Black Disciples organization.
J. T., the college-educated leader of his franchise, reported
to a central leadership of about twenty men that was called, without
irony, the board of directors. (At the same time that white suburbanites
were studiously mimicking black rappers ghetto culture, black
ghetto criminals were studiously mimicking the suburbanites dads
corp-think.) J. T. paid the board of directors nearly 20 percent of his
revenues for the right to sell crack in a designated twelve-square-block
area. The rest of the money was his to distribute as he saw fit.
Three officers reported directly to J. T.: an enforcer (who ensured
the gang members safety), a treasurer (who watched over the gangs
89
FREAKONOMICS
liquid assets), and a runner (who transported large quantities of drugs
and money to and from the supplier). Beneath the officers were the
street-level salesmen known as foot soldiers. The goal of a foot soldier
was to someday become an officer. J. T. had anywhere from twentyfive
to seventy-five foot soldiers on his payroll at any given time, depending
on the time of year (autumn was the best crack-selling season;
summer and Christmastime were slow) and the size of the gangs territory
(which doubled at one point when the Black Disciples engineered
a hostile takeover of a rival gangs turf ). At the very bottom of
J. T.s organization were as many as two hundred members known as
the rank and file. They were not employees at all. They did, however,
pay dues to the gangsome for protection from rival gangs, others for
the chance to eventually earn a job as a foot soldier.
The four years recorded in the gangs notebooks coincided with
the peak years of the crack boom, and business was excellent. J. T.s
franchise quadrupled its revenues during this period. In the first year,
it took in an average of $18,500 each month; by the final year, it was
collecting $68,400 a month. Heres a look at the monthly revenues in
the third year:
Drug sales $24,800
Dues 5,100
Extortionary taxes 2,100
Total monthly revenues $32,000
Drug sales represents only the money from dealing crack cocaine.
The gang did allow some rank-and-file members to sell heroin
on its turf but accepted a fixed licensing fee in lieu of a share of profits.
(This was off-the-books money and went straight into J. T.s
pocket; he probably skimmed from other sources as well.) The $5,100
in dues came from rank-and-file members only, since full gang mem-
90
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
bers didnt pay dues. The extortionary taxes were paid by other businesses
that operated on the gangs turf, including grocery stores, gypsy
cabs, pimps, and people selling stolen goods or repairing cars on the
street.
Now, heres what it cost J. T., excluding wages, to bring in that
$32,000 per month:
Wholesale cost of drugs $ 5,000
Board of directors fee 5,000
Mercenary fighters 1,300
Weapons 300
Miscellaneous 2,400
Total monthly nonwage costs $14,000
Mercenary fighters were nonmembers hired on short-term contracts
to help the gang fight turf wars. The cost of weapons is small
here because the Black Disciples had a side deal with local gunrunners,
helping them navigate the neighborhood in exchange for free or
steeply discounted guns. The miscellaneous expenses include legal
fees, parties, bribes, and gang-sponsored community events. (The
Black Disciples worked hard to be seen as a pillar rather than a
scourge of the housing-project community.) The miscellaneous expenses
also include the costs associated with a gang members murder.
The gang not only paid for the funeral but often gave a stipend of up
to three years wages to the victims family. Venkatesh had once asked
why the gang was so generous in this regard. Thats a fucking stupid
question, he was told,  cause as long as you been with us, you still
dont understand that their families is our families. We cant just leave
em out. We been knowing these folks our whole lives, man, so we
grieve when they grieve. You got to respect the family. There was another
reason for the death benefits: the gang feared community back-
9 1
FREAKONOMICS
lash (its enterprise was plainly a destructive one) and figured it could
buy some goodwill for a few hundred dollars here and there.
The rest of the money the gang took in went to its members, starting
with J. T. Here is the single line item in the gangs budget that
made J. T. the happiest:
Net monthly profit accruing to leader $8,500
At $8,500 per month, J. T.s annual salary was about $100,000
tax-free, of course, and not including the various off-the-books
money he pocketed. This was a lot more than he earned at his shortlived
office job in the Loop. And J. T. was just one of roughly 100
leaders at this level within the Black Disciples network. So there were
indeed some drug dealers who could afford to live largeor, in the
case of the gangs board of directors, extremely large. Each of those top
20 bosses stood to earn about $500,000 a year. (A third of them, however,
were typically imprisoned at any time, a significant downside of
an up position in an illicit industry.)
So the top 120 men on the Black Disciples pyramid were paid
very well. But the pyramid they sat atop was gigantic. Using J. T.s
franchise as a yardstick3 officers and roughly 50 foot soldiers
there were some 5,300 other men working for those 120 bosses. Then
there were another 20,000 unpaid rank-and-file members, many
of whom wanted nothing more than an opportunity to become a
foot soldier. They were even willing to pay gang dues to have their
chance.
And how well did that dream job pay? Here are the monthly totals
for the wages that J. T. paid his gang members:
Combined wages paid to all three officers $2,100
Combined wages paid to all foot soldiers 7,400
Total monthly gang wages (excluding leader) $9,500
92
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
So J. T. paid his employees $9,500, a combined monthly salary that
was only $1,000 more than his own official salary. J. T.s hourly wage
was $66. His three officers, meanwhile, each took home $700 a
month, which works out to about $7 an hour. And the foot soldiers
earned just $3.30 an hour, less than the minimum wage. So the answer
to the original questionif drug dealers make so much money,
why are they still living with their mothers?is that, except for the
top cats, they dont make much money. They had no choice but to live
with their mothers. For every big earner, there were hundreds more
just scraping along. The top 120 men in the Black Disciples gang represented
just 2.2 percent of the full-fledged gang membership but
took home well more than half the money.
In other words, a crack gang works pretty much like the standard
capitalist enterprise: you have to be near the top of the pyramid to
make a big wage. Notwithstanding the leaderships rhetoric about the
family nature of the business, the gangs wages are about as skewed as
wages in corporate America. A foot soldier had plenty in common
with a McDonalds burger flipper or a Wal-Mart shelf stocker. In fact,
most of J. T.s foot soldiers also held minimum-wage jobs in the legitimate
sector to supplement their skimpy illicit earnings. The leader of
another crack gang once told Venkatesh that he could easily afford to
pay his foot soldiers more, but it wouldnt be prudent. You got all
these niggers below you who want your job, you dig? he said. So,
you know, you try to take care of them, but you know, you also have
to show them you the boss. You always have to get yours first, or else
you really aint no leader. If you start taking losses, they see you as
weak and shit.
Along with the bad pay, the foot soldiers faced terrible job conditions.
For starters, they had to stand on a street corner all day and do
business with crackheads. (The gang members were strongly advised
against using the product themselves, advice that was enforced by
beatings if necessary.) Foot soldiers also risked arrest and, more worri-
93
FREAKONOMICS
some, violence. Using the gangs financial documents and the rest of
Venkateshs research, it is possible to construct an adverse-events
index of J. T.s gang during the four years in question. The results are
astonishingly bleak. If you were a member of J. T.s gang for all four
years, here is the typical fate you would have faced during that period:
Number of times arrested 5.9
Number of nonfatal wounds or injuries 2.4
(not including injuries meted
out by the gang itself for rules
violations)
Chance of being killed 1 in 4
A 1-in-4 chance of being killed! Compare these odds with those
for a timber cutter, which the Bureau of Labor Statistics calls the most
dangerous job in the United States. Over four years time, a timber
cutter would stand only a 1-in-200 chance of being killed. Or compare
the crack dealers odds to those of a death-row inmate in Texas,
which executes more prisoners than any other state. In 2003, Texas
put to death twenty-four inmatesor just 5 percent of the nearly 500
inmates on its death row during that time. Which means that you
stand a greater chance of dying while dealing crack in a Chicago housing
project than you do while sitting on death row in Texas.
So if crack dealing is the most dangerous job in America, and if
the salary was only $3.30 an hour, why on earth would anyone take
such a job?
Well, for the same reason that a pretty Wisconsin farm girl moves
to Hollywood. For the same reason that a high-school quarterback
wakes up at 5 a.m. to lift weights. They all want to succeed in an ex-
94
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
tremely competitive field in which, if you reach the top, you are paid
a fortune (to say nothing of the attendant glory and power).
To the kids growing up in a housing project on Chicagos south
side, crack dealing seemed like a glamour profession. For many of
them, the job of gang bosshighly visible and highly lucrativewas
easily the best job they thought they had access to. Had they grown up
under different circumstances, they might have thought about becoming
economists or writers. But in the neighborhood where J. T.s
gang operated, the path to a decent legitimate job was practically invisible.
Fifty-six percent of the neighborhoods children lived below
the poverty line (compared to a national average of 18 percent). Seventy-
eight percent came from single-parent homes. Fewer than 5 percent
of the neighborhoods adults had a college degree; barely one in
three adult men worked at all. The neighborhoods median income
was about $15,000 a year, well less than half the U.S. average. During
the years that Venkatesh lived with J. T.s gang, foot soldiers often
asked his help in landing what they called a good job: working as a
janitor at the University of Chicago.
The problem with crack dealing is the same as in every other glamour
profession: a lot of people are competing for a very few prizes.
Earning big money in the crack gang wasnt much more likely than
the Wisconsin farm girl becoming a movie star or the high-school
quarterback playing in the NFL. But criminals, like everyone else, respond
to incentives. So if the prize is big enough, they will form a line
down the block just hoping for a chance. On the south side of Chicago,
people wanting to sell crack vastly outnumbered the available
street corners.
These budding drug lords bumped up against an immutable law
of labor: when there are a lot of people willing and able to do a job,
that job generally doesnt pay well. This is one of four meaningful factors
that determine a wage. The others are the specialized skills a job
95
FREAKONOMICS
requires, the unpleasantness of a job, and the demand for services that
the job fulfills.
The delicate balance between these factors helps explain why, for
instance, the typical prostitute earns more than the typical architect.
It may not seem as though she should. The architect would appear to
be more skilled (as the word is usually defined) and better educated
(again, as usually defined). But little girls dont grow up dreaming
of becoming prostitutes, so the supply of potential prostitutes is
relatively small. Their skills, while not necessarily specialized, are
practiced in a very specialized context. The job is unpleasant and forbidding
in at least two significant ways: the likelihood of violence and
the lost opportunity of having a stable family life. As for demand?
Lets just say that an architect is more likely to hire a prostitute than
vice versa.
In the glamour professionsmovies, sports, music, fashion
there is a different dynamic at play. Even in second-tier glamour industries
like publishing, advertising, and media, swarms of bright
young people throw themselves at grunt jobs that pay poorly and demand
unstinting devotion. An editorial assistant earning $22,000 at a
Manhattan publishing house, an unpaid high-school quarterback,
and a teenage crack dealer earning $3.30 an hour are all playing the
same game, a game that is best viewed as a tournament.
The rules of a tournament are straightforward. You must start at
the bottom to have a shot at the top. ( Just as a Major League shortstop
probably played Little League and just as a Grand Dragon of the
Ku Klux Klan probably started out as a lowly spear-carrier, a drug lord
typically began by selling drugs on a street corner.) You must be willing
to work long and hard at substandard wages. In order to advance
in the tournament, you must prove yourself not merely above average
but spectacular. (The way to distinguish yourself differs from profession
to profession, of course; while J. T. certainly monitored his foot
96
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
soldiers sales performance, it was their force of personality that really
countedmore than it would for, say, a shortstop.) And finally, once
you come to the sad realization that you will never make it to the
top, you will quit the tournament. (Some people hang on longer than
otherswitness the graying actors who wait tables in New York
but people generally get the message quite early.)
Most of J. T.s foot soldiers were unwilling to stay foot soldiers for
long after they realized they werent advancing. Especially once the
shooting started. After several relatively peaceful years, J. T.s gang got
involved in a turf war with a neighboring gang. Drive-by shootings
became a daily event. For a foot soldierthe gangs man on the
streetthis development was particularly dangerous. The nature of
the business demanded that customers be able to find him easily and
quickly; if he hid from the other gang, he couldnt sell his crack.
Until the gang war, J. T.s foot soldiers had been willing to balance
the risky, low-paying job with the reward of advancement. But as one
foot soldier told Venkatesh, he now wanted to be compensated for the
added risk: Would you stand around here when all this shit is going
on? No, right? So if I gonna be asked to put my life on the line, then
front me the cash, man. Pay me more cause it aint worth my time to
be here when theyre warring.
J. T. hadnt wanted this war. For one thing, he was forced to pay his
foot soldiers higher wages because of the added risk. Far worse, gang
warfare was bad for business. If Burger King and McDonalds launch
a price war to gain market share, they partly make up in volume what
they lose in price. (Nor is anyone getting shot.) But with a gang war,
sales plummet because customers are so scared of the violence that
they wont come out in the open to buy their crack. In every way, war
was expensive for J. T.
So why did he start the war? As a matter of fact, he didnt. It was his
foot soldiers who started it. It turns out that a crack boss didnt have as
97
FREAKONOMICS
much control over his subordinates as he would have liked. Thats because
they had different incentives.
For J. T., violence was a distraction from the business at hand; he
would have preferred that his members never fired a single gunshot.
For a foot soldier, however, violence served a purpose. One of the few
ways that a foot soldier could distinguish himselfand advance in
the tournamentwas by proving his mettle for violence. A killer was
respected, feared, talked about. A foot soldiers incentive was to make
a name for himself; J. T.s incentive was, in effect, to keep the foot soldiers
from doing so. We try to tell these shorties that they belong to
a serious organization, he once told Venkatesh. It aint all about
killing. They see these movies and shit, they think its all about running
around tearing shit up. But its not. Youve got to learn to be part
of an organization; you cant be fighting all the time. Its bad for business.
In the end, J. T. prevailed. He oversaw the gangs expansion and
ushered in a new era of prosperity and relative peace. J. T. was a winner.
He was paid well because so few people could do what he did. He
was a tall, good-looking, smart, tough man who knew how to motivate
people. He was shrewd too, never tempting arrest by carrying
guns or cash. While the rest of his gang lived in poverty with their
mothers, J. T. had several homes, several women, several cars. He also
had his business education, of course. He constantly worked to extend
this advantage. That was why he ordered the corporate-style
bookkeeping that eventually found its way into Sudhir Venkateshs
hands. No other franchise leader had ever done such a thing. J. T.
once showed his ledgers to the board of directors to prove, as if proof
were needed, the extent of his business acumen.
And it worked. After six years running his local gang, J. T. was promoted
to the board of directors. He was now thirty-four years old. He
had won the tournament. But this tournament had a catch that pub-
98
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
lishing and pro sports and even Hollywood dont have. Selling drugs,
after all, is illegal. Not long after he made the board of directors, the
Black Disciples were essentially shut down by a federal indictment
the same indictment that led the gangster named Booty to turn over
his notebooks to Venkateshand J. T. was sent to prison.
Now for another unlikely question: what did crack cocaine have in
common with nylon stockings?
In 1939, when DuPont introduced nylons, countless American
women felt as if a miracle had been performed in their honor. Until
then, stockings were made of silk, and silk was delicate, expensive,
and in ever shorter supply. By 1941, some sixty-four million pairs of
nylon stockings had been soldmore stockings than there were adult
women in the United States. They were easily affordable, immensely
appealing, practically addictive.
DuPont had pulled off the feat that every marketer dreams of: it
brought class to the masses. In this regard, the invention of nylon
stockings was markedly similar to the invention of crack cocaine.
In the 1970s, if you were the sort of person who did drugs, there
was no classier drug than cocaine. Beloved by rock stars and movie
stars, ballplayers and even the occasional politician, cocaine was a
drug of power and panache. It was clean, it was white, it was pretty.
Heroin was droopy and pot was foggy but cocaine provided a beautiful
high.
Alas, it was also very expensive. Nor did the high last long. This led
cocaine users to try jacking up the drugs potency. They did this primarily
by freebasingadding ammonia and ethyl ether to cocaine hydrochloride,
or powdered cocaine, and burning it to free up the base
cocaine. But this could be dangerous. As more than a few flamescarred
drug users could attest, chemistry is best left to chemists.
99
FREAKONOMICS
Meanwhile, cocaine dealers and aficionados across the country,
and perhaps also in the Caribbean and South America, were working
on a safer version of distilled cocaine. They found that mixing powdered
cocaine in a saucepan with baking soda and water, and then
cooking off the liquid, produced tiny rocks of smokeable cocaine. It
came to be called crack for the crackling sound the baking soda made
when it was burned. More affectionate nicknames would soon follow:
Rock, Kryptonite, Kibbles n Bits, Scrabble, and Love. By the early
1980s, the class drug was ready for the masses. Now only two things
were needed to turn crack into a phenomenon: an abundant supply of
raw cocaine and a way to get the new product to a mass market.
The cocaine was easy to come by, for the invention of crack coincided
with a Colombian cocaine glut. During the late 1970s, the
wholesale price of cocaine in the United States fell dramatically, even
as its purity was rising. One man, a Nicaraguan migr named Oscar
Danilo Blandon, was suspected of importing far more Colombian
cocaine than anyone else. Blandon did so much business with the
budding crack dealers of South Central Los Angeles that he came to
be known as the Johnny Appleseed of Crack. Blandon would later
claim that he was selling the cocaine to raise money for the CIAsponsored
Contras back home in Nicaragua. He liked to say that the
CIA was in turn watching his back in the United States, allowing him
to sell cocaine with impunity. This claim would spark a belief that still
seethes to this day, especially among urban blacks, that the CIA itself
was the chief sponsor of the American crack trade.
Verifying that claim is beyond the purview of this book. What
is demonstrably true is that Oscar Danilo Blandon helped establish
a linkbetween Colombian cocaine cartels and inner-city crack
merchantsthat would alter American history. By putting massive
amounts of cocaine into the hands of street gangs, Blandon and others
like him gave rise to a devastating crack boom. And gangs like the
Black Gangster Disciple Nation were given new reason to exist.
100
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
As long as there have been cities, there have been gangs of one sort
or another. In the United States, gangs have traditionally been a sort
of halfway house for recent immigrants. In the 1920s, Chicago alone
had more than 1,300 street gangs, catering to every ethnic, political,
and criminal leaning imaginable. As a rule, gangs would prove
much better at making mayhem than money. Some fancied themselves
commercial enterprises, and a fewthe Mafia, most notably
actually did make money (at least for the higher-ups). But most
gangsters were, as the clich assures us, two-bit gangsters.
Black street gangs in particular flourished in Chicago, with membership
in the tens of thousands by the 1970s. They constituted the
sort of criminals, petty and otherwise, who sucked the life out of
urban areas. Part of the problem was that these criminals never
seemed to get locked up. The 1960s and 1970s were, in retrospect, a
great time to be a street criminal in most American cities. The likelihood
of punishment was so lowthis was the heyday of a liberal justice
system and the criminals rights movementthat it simply didnt
cost very much to commit a crime.
By the 1980s, however, the courts had begun to radically reverse
that trend. Criminals rights were curtailed and stricter sentencing
guidelines put in place. More and more of Chicagos black gangsters
were getting sent to federal prisons. By happy coincidence, some of
their fellow inmates were Mexican gang members with close ties to
Colombian drug dealers. In the past, the black gangsters had bought
their drugs from a middleman, the Mafiawhich, as it happened,
was then being pummeled by the federal governments new antiracketeering
laws. But by the time crack came to Chicago, the black
gangsters had made the connections to buy their cocaine directly
from Colombian dealers.
Cocaine had never been a big seller in the ghetto: it was too expensive.
But that was before the invention of crack. This new product was
ideal for a low-income, street-level customer. Because it required such
1 0 1
FREAKONOMICS
a tiny amount of pure cocaine, one hit of crack cost only a few dollars.
Its powerful high reached the brain in just a few secondsand then
faded fast, sending the user back for more. From the outset, crack was
bound to be a huge success.
And who better to sell it than the thousands of junior members of
all those street gangs like the Black Gangster Disciple Nation? The
gangs already owned the territoryreal estate was, in essence, their
core businessand they were suitably menacing to keep customers
from even thinking about ripping them off. Suddenly the urban street
gang evolved from a club for wayward teenagers into a true commercial
enterprise.
The gang also presented an opportunity for longtime employment.
Before crack, it was just about impossible to earn a living in a
street gang. When it was time for a gangster to start supporting a family,
he would have to quit. There was no such thing as a thirty-year-old
gangster: he was either working a legitimate job, dead, or in prison.
But with crack, there was real money to be made. Instead of moving
on and making way for the younger gangsters to ascend, the veterans
stayed put. This was happening just as the old-fashioned sort of lifetime
jobsfactory jobs especiallywere disappearing. In the past, a
semi-skilled black man in Chicago could earn a decent wage working
in a factory. With that option narrowing, crack dealing looked even
better. How hard could it be? The stuff was so addictive that a fool
could sell it.
Who cared if the crack game was a tournament that only a few
of them could possibly win? Who cared if it was so dangerous
standing out there on a corner, selling it as fast and anonymously as
McDonalds sells hamburgers, not knowing any of your customers,
wondering who might be coming to arrest or rob or kill you? Who
cared if your product got twelve-year-olds and grandmothers and
preachers so addicted that they stopped thinking about anything except
their next hit? Who cared if crack killed the neighborhood?
1 0 2
Dr u g De a l e r s L i v i n g wi t h Th e i r Moms
For black Americans, the four decades between World War II and
the crack boom had been marked by steady and often dramatic improvement.
Particularly since the civil rights legislation of the mid-
1960s, the telltale signs of societal progress had finally taken root
among black Americans. The black-white income gap was shrinking.
So was the gap between black childrens test scores and those of white
children. Perhaps the most heartening gain had been in infant mortality.
As late as 1964, a black infant was twice as likely to die as a
white infant, often of a cause as basic as diarrhea or pneumonia. With
segregated hospitals, many black patients received what amounted to
Third World care. But that changed when the federal government ordered
the hospitals to be desegregated: within just seven years, the
black infant mortality rate had been cut in half. By the 1980s, virtually
every facet of life was improving for black Americans, and the
progress showed no sign of stopping.
Then came crack cocaine.
While crack use was hardly a black-only phenomenon, it hit black
neighborhoods much harder than most. The evidence can be seen by
measuring the same indicators of societal progress cited above. After
decades of decline, black infant mortality began to soar in the 1980s,
as did the rate of low-birthweight babies and parent abandonment.
The gap between black and white schoolchildren widened. The number
of blacks sent to prison tripled. Crack was so dramatically destructive
that if its effect is averaged for all black Americans, not just
crack users and their families, you will see that the groups postwar
progress was not only stopped cold but was often knocked as much as
ten years backward. Black Americans were hurt more by crack cocaine
than by any other single cause since Jim Crow.
And then there was the crime. Within a five-year period, the homicide
rate among young urban blacks quadrupled. Suddenly it was just
as dangerous to live in parts of Chicago or St. Louis or Los Angeles as
it was to live in Bogot.
1 0 3
FREAKONOMICS
The violence associated with the crack boom was various and relentless.
It coincided with an even broader American crime wave that
had been building for two decades. Although the rise of this crime
wave long predated crack, the trend was so exacerbated by crack that
criminologists got downright apocalyptic in their predictions. James
Alan Fox, perhaps the most widely quoted crime expert in the popular
press, warned of a coming bloodbath of youth violence.
But Fox and the other purveyors of conventional wisdom turned
out to be wrong. The bloodbath did not materialize. The crime rate in
fact began to fallso unexpectedly and dramatically and thoroughly
that now, from the distance of several years, it is almost hard to recall
the crushing grip of that crime wave.
Why did it fall?
For a few reasons, but one of them more surprising than the rest.
Oscar Danilo Blandon, the so-called Johnny Appleseed of Crack,
may have been the instigator of one ripple effect, in which by his
actions a single person inadvertently causes an ocean of despair. But
unbeknownst to just about everybody, another remarkably powerful
ripple effectthis one moving in the opposite directionhad just
come into play.
104
4 Where Have All the
Criminals Gone?
In 1966, one year after Nicolae Ceausescu became the Communist
dictator of Romania, he made abortion illegal. The fetus is the property
of the entire society, he proclaimed. Anyone who avoids having
children is a deserter who abandons the laws of national continuity.
Such grandiose declarations were commonplace during Ceaus
escus reign, for his master planto create a nation worthy of the
New Socialist Manwas an exercise in grandiosity. He built palaces
for himself while alternately brutalizing and neglecting his citizens.
Abandoning agriculture in favor of manufacturing, he forced many of
the nations rural dwellers into unheated apartment buildings. He
gave government positions to forty family members including his
wife, Elena, who required forty homes and a commensurate supply of
fur and jewels. Madame Ceausescu, known officially as the Best
Mother Romania Could Have, was not particularly maternal. The
worms never get satisfied, regardless of how much food you give
them, she said when Romanians complained about the food shortFREAKONOMICS
ages brought on by her husbands mismanagement. She had her own
children bugged to ensure their loyalty.
Ceausescus ban on abortion was designed to achieve one of his
major aims: to rapidly strengthen Romania by boosting its population.
Until 1966, Romania had had one of the most liberal abortion
policies in the world. Abortion was in fact the main form of birth
control, with four abortions for every live birth. Now, virtually
overnight, abortion was forbidden. The only exemptions were mothers
who already had four children or women with significant standing
in the Communist Party. At the same time, all contraception and sex
education were banned. Government agents sardonically known as
the Menstrual Police regularly rounded up women in their workplaces
to administer pregnancy tests. If a woman repeatedly failed to
conceive, she was forced to pay a steep celibacy tax.
Ceausescus incentives produced the desired effect. Within one
year of the abortion ban, the Romanian birth rate had doubled. These
babies were born into a country where, unless you belonged to the
Ceausescu clan or the Communist elite, life was miserable. But these
children would turn out to have particularly miserable lives. Compared
to Romanian children born just a year earlier, the cohort of children
born after the abortion ban would do worse in every measurable
way: they would test lower in school, they would have less success in
the labor market, and they would also prove much more likely to become
criminals.
The abortion ban stayed in effect until Ceausescu finally lost his
grip on Romania. On December 16, 1989, thousands of people took
to the streets of Timisoara to protest his corrosive regime. Many of
the protestors were teenagers and college students. The police killed
dozens of them. One of the opposition leaders, a forty-one-year-old
professor, later said it was his thirteen-year-old daughter who insisted
he attend the protest, despite his fear. What is most interesting is that
106
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
we learned not to be afraid from our children, he said. Most were
aged thirteen to twenty. A few days after the massacre in Timisoara,
Ceausescu gave a speech in Bucharest before one hundred thousand
people. Again the young people were out in force. They shouted
down Ceausescu with cries of Timisoara! and Down with the
murderers! His time had come. He and Elena tried to escape the
country with $1 billion, but they were captured, given a crude trial,
and, on Christmas Day, executed by firing squad.
Of all the Communist leaders deposed in the years bracketing the
collapse of the Soviet Union, only Nicolae Ceausescu met a violent
death. It should not be overlooked that his demise was precipitated in
large measure by the youth of Romaniaa great number of whom,
were it not for his abortion ban, would never have been born at all.
The story of abortion in Romania might seem an odd way to begin
telling the story of American crime in the 1990s. But its not. In one
important way, the Romanian abortion story is a reverse image of the
American crime story. The point of overlap was on that Christmas
Day of 1989, when Nicolae Ceausescu learned the hard waywith a
bullet to the headthat his abortion ban had much deeper implications
than he knew.
On that day, crime was just about at its peak in the United States.
In the previous fifteen years, violent crime had risen 80 percent. It was
crime that led the nightly news and the national conversation.
When the crime rate began falling in the early 1990s, it did so with
such speed and suddenness that it surprised everyone. It took some
experts many years to even recognize that crime was falling, so confident
had they been of its continuing rise. Long after crime had
peaked, in fact, some of them continued to predict ever darker scenarios.
But the evidence was irrefutable: the long and brutal spike in
1 0 7
FREAK ONOMIC S
crime was moving in the opposite direction, and it wouldnt stop until
the crime rate had fallen back to the levels of forty years earlier.
Now the experts hustled to explain their faulty forecasting. The
criminologist James Alan Fox explained that his warning of a bloodbath
was in fact an intentional overstatement. I never said there
would be blood flowing in the streets, he said, but I used strong
terms like bloodbath to get peoples attention. And it did. I dont
apologize for using alarmist terms. (If Fox seems to be offering a distinction
without a differencebloodbath versus blood flowing in
the streetswe should remember that even in retreat mode, experts
can be self-serving.)
After the relief had settled in, after people remembered how to go
about their lives without the pressing fear of crime, there arose a natural
question: just where did all those criminals go?
At one level, the answer seemed puzzling. After all, if none of the
criminologists, police officials, economists, politicians, or others who
traffic in such matters had foreseen the crime decline, how could they
suddenly identify its causes?
But this diverse army of experts now marched out a phalanx of
hypotheses to explain the drop in crime. A great many newspaper
articles would be written on the subject. Their conclusions often
hinged on which expert had most recently spoken to which reporter.
Here, ranked by frequency of mention, are the crime-drop explanations
cited in articles published from 1991 to 2001 in the ten largestcirculation
papers in the LexisNexis database:
CRIME-DROP EXPLANATION NUMBER OF CITATIONS
1. Innovative policing strategies 52
2. Increased reliance on prisons 47
3. Changes in crack and other drug markets 33
4. Aging of the population 32
108
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
CRIME-DROP EXPLANATION NUMBER OF CITATIONS
5. Tougher gun-control laws 32
6. Strong economy 28
7. Increased number of police 26
8. All other explanations (increased use of 34
capital punishment, concealed-weapons
laws, gun buybacks, and others)
If you are the sort of person who likes guessing games, you may
wish to spend the next few moments pondering which of the preceding
explanations seem to have merit and which dont. Hint: of the
seven major explanations on the list, only three can be shown to have
contributed to the drop in crime. The others are, for the most part,
figments of someones imagination, self-interest, or wishful thinking.
Further hint: one of the greatest measurable causes of the crime drop
does not appear on the list at all, for it didnt receive a single newspaper
mention.
Lets begin with a fairly uncontroversial one: the strong economy. The
decline in crime that began in the early 1990s was accompanied by a
blistering national economy and a significant drop in unemployment.
It might seem to follow that the economy was a hammer that helped
beat down crime. But a closer look at the data destroys this theory. It
is true that a stronger job market may make certain crimes relatively
less attractive. But that is only the case for crimes with a direct financial
motivationburglary, robbery, and auto theftas opposed to violent
crimes like homicide, assault, and rape. Moreover, studies have
shown that an unemployment decline of 1 percentage point accounts
for a 1 percent drop in nonviolent crime. During the 1990s, the unemployment
rate fell by 2 percentage points; nonviolent crime,
109
FREAKONOMICS
meanwhile, fell by roughly 40 percent. But an even bigger flaw in the
strong-economy theory concerns violent crime. Homicide fell at a
greater rate during the 1990s than any other sort of crime, and a number
of reliable studies have shown virtually no link between the economy
and violent crime. This weak link is made even weaker by
glancing back to a recent decade, the 1960s, when the economy went
on a wild growth spurtas did violent crime. So while a strong 1990s
economy might have seemed, on the surface, a likely explanation for
the drop in crime, it almost certainly didnt affect criminal behavior in
any significant way.
Unless, that is, the economy is construed in a broader senseas
a means to build and maintain hundreds of prisons. Lets now consider
another crime-drop explanation: increased reliance on prisons. It
might help to start by flipping the crime question around. Instead of
wondering what made crime fall, think about this: why had it risen so
dramatically in the first place?
During the first half of the twentieth century, the incidence of violent
crime in the United States was, for the most part, fairly steady. But
in the early 1960s, it began to climb. In retrospect, it is clear that one
of the major factors pushing this trend was a more lenient justice system.
Conviction rates declined during the 1960s, and criminals who
were convicted served shorter sentences. This trend was driven in part
by an expansion in the rights of people accused of crimesa long
overdue expansion, some would argue. (Others would argue that the
expansion went too far.) At the same time, politicians were growing
increasingly softer on crimefor fear of sounding racist, as the
economist Gary Becker has written, since African-Americans and
Hispanics commit a disproportionate share of felonies. So if you were
the kind of person who might want to commit a crime, the incentives
were lining up in your favor: a slimmer likelihood of being convicted
and, if convicted, a shorter prison term. Because criminals respond to
incentives as readily as anyone, the result was a surge in crime.
1 1 0
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
It took some time, and a great deal of political turmoil, but these
incentives were eventually curtailed. Criminals who would have previously
been set freefor drug-related offenses and parole revocation
in particularwere instead locked up. Between 1980 and 2000, there
was a fifteenfold increase in the number of people sent to prison on
drug charges. Many other sentences, especially for violent crime, were
lengthened. The total effect was dramatic. By 2000, more than two
million people were in prison, roughly four times the number as of
1972. Fully half of that increase took place during the 1990s.
The evidence linking increased punishment with lower crime rates
is very strong. Harsh prison terms have been shown to act as both deterrent
(for the would-be criminal on the street) and prophylactic (for
the would-be criminal who is already locked up). Logical as this may
sound, some criminologists have fought the logic. A 1977 academic
study called On Behalf of a Moratorium on Prison Construction
noted that crime rates tend to be high when imprisonment rates are
high, and concluded that crime would fall if imprisonment rates
could only be lowered. (Fortunately, jailers did not suddenly turn
loose their wards and sit back waiting for crime to fall. As the political
scientist John J. DiIulio Jr. later commented, Apparently, it takes a
Ph.D. in criminology to doubt that keeping dangerous criminals incarcerated
cuts crime.)
The Moratorium argument rests on a fundamental confusion of
correlation and causality. Consider a parallel argument. The mayor of
a city sees that his citizens celebrate wildly when their team wins the
World Series. He is intrigued by this correlation but, like the Moratorium
author, fails to see the direction in which the correlation runs.
So the following year, the mayor decrees that his citizens start celebrating
the World Series before the first pitch is thrownan act that, in
his confused mind, will ensure a victory.
There are certainly plenty of reasons to dislike the huge surge in
the prison population. Not everyone is pleased that such a significant
1 1 1
FREAKONOMICS
fraction of Americans, especially black Americans, live behind bars.
Nor does prison even begin to address the root causes of crime, which
are diverse and complex. Lastly, prison is hardly a cheap solution: it
costs about $25,000 a year to keep someone incarcerated. But if the
goal here is to explain the drop in crime in the 1990s, imprisonment
is certainly one of the key answers. It accounts for roughly one-third
of the drop in crime.
Another crime-drop explanation is often cited in tandem with imprisonment:
the increased use of capital punishment. The number of executions
in the United States quadrupled between the 1980s and the
1990s, leading many people to concludein the context of a debate
that has been going on for decadesthat capital punishment helped
drive down crime. Lost in the debate, however, are two important facts.
First, given the rarity with which executions are carried out in this
country and the long delays in doing so, no reasonable criminal
should be deterred by the threat of execution. Even though capital
punishment quadrupled within a decade, there were still only 478 executions
in the entire United States during the 1990s. Any parent
who has ever said to a recalcitrant child, Okay, Im going to count to
ten and this time Im really going to punish you, knows the difference
between deterrent and empty threat. New York State, for instance,
has not as of this writing executed a single criminal since
reinstituting its death penalty in 1995. Even among prisoners on
death row, the annual execution rate is only 2 percentcompared
with the 7 percent annual chance of dying faced by a member of the
Black Gangster Disciple Nation crack gang. If life on death row is
safer than life on the streets, its hard to believe that the fear of execution
is a driving force in a criminals calculus. Like the $3 fine for latearriving
parents at the Israeli day-care centers, the negative incentive
of capital punishment simply isnt serious enough for a criminal to
change his behavior.
1 1 2
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
The second flaw in the capital punishment argument is even more
obvious. Assume for a moment that the death penalty is a deterrent.
How much crime does it actually deter? The economist Isaac Ehrlich,
in an oft-cited 1975 paper, put forth an estimate that is generally considered
optimistic: executing 1 criminal translates into 7 fewer homicides
that the criminal might have committed. Now do the math. In
1991, there were 14 executions in the United States; in 2001, there
were 66. According to Ehrlichs calculation, those 52 additional executions
would have accounted for 364 fewer homicides in 2001not
a small drop, to be sure, but less than 4 percent of the actual decrease
in homicides that year. So even in a death penalty advocates best-case
scenario, capital punishment could explain only one twenty-fifth of
the drop in homicides in the 1990s. And because the death penalty is
rarely given for crimes other than homicide, its deterrent effect cannot
account for a speck of decline in other violent crimes.
It is extremely unlikely, therefore, that the death penalty, as currently
practiced in the United States, exerts any real influence on
crime rates. Even many of its onetime supporters have come to this
conclusion. I feel morally and intellectually obligated simply to concede
that the death penalty experiment has failed, said U.S. Supreme
Court Justice Harry A. Blackmun in 1994, nearly twenty years after
he had voted for its reinstatement. I no longer shall tinker with the
machinery of death.
So it wasnt capital punishment that drove crime down, nor was it the
booming economy. But higher rates of imprisonment did have a lot to
do with it. All those criminals didnt march into jail by themselves, of
course. Someone had to investigate the crime, catch the bad guy, and
put together the case that would get him convicted. Which naturally
leads to a related pair of crime-drop explanations:
1 1 3
FREAKONOMICS
Innovative policing strategies
Increased number of police
Lets address the second one first. The number of police officers per
capita in the United States rose about 14 percent during the 1990s.
Does merely increasing the number of police, however, reduce crime?
The answer would seem obviousyesbut proving that answer isnt
so easy. Thats because when crime is rising, people clamor for protection,
and invariably more money is found for cops. So if you just look
at raw correlations between police and crime, you will find that when
there are more police, there tends to be more crime. That doesnt
mean, of course, that the police are causing the crime, just as it doesnt
mean, as some criminologists have argued, that crime will fall if criminals
are released from prison.
To show causality, we need a scenario in which more police are
hired for reasons completely unrelated to rising crime. If, for instance,
police were randomly sprinkled in some cities and not in others, we
could look to see whether crime declines in the cities where the police
happen to land.
As it turns out, that exact scenario is often created by vote-hungry
politicians. In the months leading up to Election Day, incumbent
mayors routinely try to lock up the law-and-order vote by hiring more
policeeven when the crime rate is standing still. So by comparing
the crime rate in one set of cities that have recently had an election
(and which therefore hired extra police) with another set of cities that
had no election (and therefore no extra police), its possible to tease
out the effect of the extra police on crime. The answer: yes indeed, additional
police substantially lower the crime rate.
Again, it may help to look backward and see why crime had risen
so much in the first place. From 1960 to 1985, the number of police
officers fell more than 50 percent relative to the number of crimes. In
1 1 4
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
some cases, hiring additional police was considered a violation of the
eras liberal aesthetic; in others, it was simply deemed too expensive.
This 50 percent decline in police translated into a roughly equal decline
in the probability that a given criminal would be caught. Coupled
with the above-cited leniency in the other half of the criminal
justice system, the courtrooms, this decrease in policing created a
strong positive incentive for criminals.
By the 1990s, philosophiesand necessitieshad changed. The
policing trend was put in reverse, with wide-scale hiring in cities
across the country. Not only did all those police act as a deterrent, but
they also provided the manpower to imprison criminals who might
have otherwise gone uncaught. The hiring of additional police accounted
for roughly 10 percent of the 1990s crime drop.
But it wasnt only the number of police that changed in the 1990s;
consider the most commonly cited crime-drop explanation of all:
innovative policing strategies.
There was perhaps no more attractive theory than the belief that
smart policing stops crime. It offered a set of bona fide heroes rather
than simply a dearth of villains. This theory rapidly became an article
of faith because it appealed to the factors that, according to John Kenneth
Galbraith, most contribute to the formation of conventional
wisdom: the ease with which an idea may be understood and the degree
to which it affects our personal well-being.
The story played out most dramatically in New York City, where
newly elected mayor Rudolph Giuliani and his handpicked police
commissioner, William Bratton, vowed to fix the citys desperate
crime situation. Bratton took a novel approach to policing. He ushered
the NYPD into what one senior police official later called our
Athenian period, in which new ideas were given weight over calcified
practices. Instead of coddling his precinct commanders, Bratton demanded
accountability. Instead of relying solely on old-fashioned cop
1 1 5
FREAKONOMICS
know-how, he introduced technological solutions like CompStat, a
computerized method of addressing crime hot spots.
The most compelling new idea that Bratton brought to life
stemmed from the broken window theory, which was conceived by
the criminologists James Q. Wilson and George Kelling. The broken
window theory argues that minor nuisances, if left unchecked, turn
into major nuisances: that is, if someone breaks a window and sees it
isnt fixed immediately, he gets the signal that its all right to break the
rest of the windows and maybe set the building afire too.
So with murder raging all around, Bill Brattons cops began to
police the sort of deeds that used to go unpoliced: jumping a subway
turnstile, panhandling too aggressively, urinating in the streets, swabbing
a filthy squeegee across a cars windshield unless the driver made
an appropriate donation.
Most New Yorkers loved this crackdown on its own merit. But
they particularly loved the idea, as stoutly preached by Bratton and
Giuliani, that choking off these small crimes was like choking off the
criminal elements oxygen supply. Todays turnstile jumper might easily
be wanted for yesterdays murder. That junkie peeing in an alley
might have been on his way to a robbery.
As violent crime began to fall dramatically, New Yorkers were more
than happy to heap laurels on their operatic, Brooklyn-bred mayor
and his hatchet-faced police chief with the big Boston accent. But
the two strong-willed men werent very good at sharing the glory.
Soon after the citys crime turnaround landed Brattonand not
Giulianion the cover of Time, Bratton was pushed to resign. He
had been police commissioner for just twenty-seven months.
New York City was a clear innovator in police strategies during the
1990s crime drop, and it also enjoyed the greatest decline in crime of
any large American city. Homicide rates fell from 30.7 per 100,000
people in 1990 to 8.4 per 100,000 people in 2000, a change of 73.6
1 1 6
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
percent. But a careful analysis of the facts shows that the innovative
policing strategies probably had little effect on this huge decline.
First, the drop in crime in New York began in 1990. By the end of
1993, the rate of property crime and violent crime, including homicides,
had already fallen nearly 20 percent. Rudolph Giuliani, however,
did not become mayorand install Brattonuntil early 1994.
Crime was well on its way down before either man arrived. And it
would continue to fall long after Bratton was bumped from office.
Second, the new police strategies were accompanied by a much
more significant change within the police force: a hiring binge. Between
1991 and 2001, the NYPD grew by 45 percent, more than
three times the national average. As argued above, an increase in the
number of police, regardless of new strategies, has been proven to reduce
crime. By a conservative calculation, this huge expansion of
New Yorks police force would be expected to reduce crime in New
York by 18 percent relative to the national average. If you subtract
that 18 percent from New Yorks homicide reduction, thereby discounting
the effect of the police-hiring surge, New York no longer
leads the nation with its 73.6 percent drop; it goes straight to the middle
of the pack. Many of those new police were in fact hired by David
Dinkins, the mayor whom Giuliani defeated. Dinkins had been desperate
to secure the law-and-order vote, having known all along that
his opponent would be Giuliani, a former federal prosecutor. (The
two men had run against each other four years earlier as well.) So
those who wish to credit Giuliani with the crime drop may still do so,
for it was his own law-and-order reputation that made Dinkins hire
all those police. In the end, of course, the police increase helped everyone
but it helped Giuliani a lot more than Dinkins.
Most damaging to the claim that New Yorks police innovations
radically lowered crime is one simple and often overlooked fact: crime
went down everywhere during the 1990s, not only in New York. Few
1 1 7
FREAKONOMICS
other cities tried the kind of strategies that New York did, and certainly
none with the same zeal. But even in Los Angeles, a city notorious
for bad policing, crime fell at about the same rate as it did in New
York once the growth in New Yorks police force is accounted for.
It would be churlish to argue that smart policing isnt a good thing.
Bill Bratton certainly deserves credit for invigorating New Yorks police
force. But there is frighteningly little evidence that his strategy
was the crime panacea that he and the media deemed it. The next step
will be to continue measuring the impact of police innovationsin
Los Angeles, for instance, where Bratton himself became police chief
in late 2002. While he duly instituted some of the innovations that
were his hallmark in New York, Bratton announced that his highest
priority was a more basic one: finding the money to hire thousands of
new police officers.
Now to explore another pair of common crime-drop explanations:
Tougher gun laws
Changes in crack and other drug markets
First, the guns. Debates on this subject are rarely coolheaded. Gun
advocates believe that gun laws are too strict; opponents believe exactly
the opposite. How can intelligent people view the world so differently?
Because a gun raises a complex set of issues that change
according to one factor: whose hand happens to be holding the gun.
It might be worthwhile to take a step back and ask a rudimentary
question: what is a gun? Its a tool that can be used to kill someone, of
course, but more significantly, a gun is a great disrupter of the natural
order.
A gun scrambles the outcome of any dispute. Lets say that a tough
1 1 8
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
guy and a not-so-tough guy exchange words in a bar, which leads to a
fight. Its pretty obvious to the not-so-tough guy that hell be beaten,
so why bother fighting? The pecking order remains intact. But if the
not-so-tough guy happens to have a gun, he stands a good chance of
winning. In this scenario, the introduction of a gun may well lead to
more violence.
Now instead of the tough guy and the not-so-tough guy, picture a
high-school girl out for a nighttime stroll when she is suddenly set
upon by a mugger. What if only the mugger is armed? What if only
the girl is armed? What if both are armed? A gun opponent might
argue that the gun has to be kept out of the muggers hands in the first
place. A gun advocate might argue that the high-school girl needs to
have a gun to disrupt what has become the natural order: its the bad
guys that have the guns. (If the girl scares off the mugger, then the introduction
of a gun in this case may lead to less violence.) Any mugger
with even a little initiative is bound to be armed, for in a country like
the United States, with a thriving black market in guns, anyone can
get hold of one.
There are enough guns in the United States that if you gave one to
every adult, you would run out of adults before you ran out of guns.
Nearly two-thirds of U.S. homicides involve a gun, a far greater fraction
than in other industrialized countries. Our homicide rate is also
much higher than in those countries. It would therefore seem likely
that our homicide rate is so high in part because guns are so easily
available. Research indeed shows this to be true.
But guns are not the whole story. In Switzerland, every adult male
is issued an assault rifle for militia duty and is allowed to keep the gun
at home. On a per capita basis, Switzerland has more firearms than
just about any other country, and yet it is one of the safest places in the
world. In other words, guns do not cause crime. That said, the established
U.S. methods of keeping guns away from the people who do
1 1 9
FREAKONOMICS
cause crime are, at best, feeble. And since a gununlike a bag of cocaine
or a car or a pair of pantslasts pretty much forever, even turning
off the spigot of new guns still leaves an ocean of available ones.
So bearing all this in mind, lets consider a variety of recent gun initiatives
to see the impact they may have had on crime in the 1990s.
The most famous gun-control law is the Brady Act, passed in
1993, which requires a criminal check and a waiting period before a
person can purchase a handgun. This solution may have seemed appealing
to politicians, but to an economist it doesnt make much
sense. Why? Because regulation of a legal market is bound to fail
when a healthy black market exists for the same product. With guns
so cheap and so easy to get, the standard criminal has no incentive to
fill out a firearms application at his local gun shop and then wait a
week. The Brady Act, accordingly, has proven to be practically impotent
in lowering crime. (A study of imprisoned felons showed that
even before the Brady Act, only about one-fifth of the criminals had
bought their guns through a licensed dealer.) Various local guncontrol
laws have also failed. Washington, D.C., and Chicago both
instituted handgun bans well before crime began to fall across the
country in the 1990s, and yet those two cities were laggards, not leaders,
in the national reduction in crime. One deterrent that has proven
moderately effective is a stiff increase in prison time for anyone
caught in possession of an illegal gun. But there is plenty of room for
improvement. Not that this is likely, but if the death penalty were
assessed to anyone carrying an illegal gun, and if the penalty were
actually enforced, gun crimes would surely plunge.
Another staple of 1990s crime fightingand of the evening
newswas the gun buyback. You remember the image: a menacing,
glistening heap of firearms surrounded by the mayor, the police chief,
the neighborhood activists. It made for a nice photo op, but thats
about as meaningful as a gun buyback gets. The guns that are turned
1 2 0
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
in tend to be heirlooms or junk. The payoff to the gun sellerusually
$50 or $100, but in one California buyback, three free hours of
psychotherapyisnt an adequate incentive for anyone who actually
plans to use his gun. And the number of surrendered guns is no match
for even the number of new guns simultaneously coming to market.
Given the number of handguns in the United States and the number
of homicides each year, the likelihood that a particular gun was used
to kill someone that year is 1 in 10,000. The typical gun buyback
program yields fewer than 1,000 gunswhich translates into an expectation
of less than one-tenth of one homicide per buyback. Not
enough, that is, to make even a sliver of impact on the fall of crime.
Then there is an opposite argumentthat we need more guns on
the street, but in the hands of the right people (like the high-school
girl above, instead of her mugger). The economist John R. Lott Jr. is
the main champion of this idea. His calling card is the book More
Guns, Less Crime, in which he argues that violent crime has decreased
in areas where law-abiding citizens are allowed to carry concealed
weapons. His theory might be surprising, but it is sensible. If a criminal
thinks his potential victim may be armed, he may be deterred
from committing the crime. Handgun opponents call Lott a pro-gun
ideologue, and Lott let himself become a lightning rod for gun controversy.
He exacerbated his trouble by creating a pseudonym, Mary
Rosh, to defend his theory in online debates. Rosh, identifying herself
as a former student of Lotts, praised her teachers intellect, his
evenhandedness, his charisma. I have to say that he was the best professor
that I ever had, s/he wrote. You wouldnt know that he was a
right-wing ideologue from the class. . . . There were a group of us
students who would try to take any class that he taught. Lott finally
had to tell us that it was best for us to try and take classes from other
professors more to be exposed to other ways of teaching graduate material.
Then there was the troubling allegation that Lott actually in-
1 2 1
FREAKONOMICS
vented some of the survey data that support his more-guns/less-crime
theory. Regardless of whether the data were faked, Lotts admittedly
intriguing hypothesis doesnt seem to be true. When other scholars
have tried to replicate his results, they found that right-to-carry laws
simply dont bring down crime.
Consider the next crime-drop explanation: the bursting of the crack
bubble. Crack cocaine was such a potent, addictive drug that a hugely
profitable market had been created practically overnight. True, it was
only the leaders of the crack gangs who were getting rich. But that
only made the street-level dealers all the more desperate to advance.
Many of them were willing to kill their rivals to do so, whether the
rival belonged to the same gang or a different one. There were also gun
battles over valuable drug-selling corners. The typical crack murder
involved one crack dealer shooting another (or two of them, or three)
and not, contrary to conventional wisdom, some bug-eyed crackhead
shooting a shopkeeper over a few dollars. The result was a huge increase
in violent crime. One study found that more than 25 percent of
the homicides in New York City in 1988 were crack-related.
The violence associated with crack began to ebb in about 1991.
This has led many people to think that crack itself went away. It
didnt. Smoking crack remains much more popular today than most
people realize. Nearly 5 percent of all arrests in the United States are
still related to cocaine (as against 6 percent at cracks peak); nor have
emergency room visits for crack users diminished all that much.
What did go away were the huge profits for selling crack. The price
of cocaine had been falling for years, and it got only cheaper as crack
grew more popular. Dealers began to underprice one another; profits
vanished. The crack bubble burst as dramatically as the Nasdaq bubble
would eventually burst. (Think of the first generation of crack
1 2 2
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
dealers as the Microsoft millionaires; think of the second generation
as Pets.com.) As veteran crack dealers were killed or sent to prison,
younger dealers decided that the smaller profits didnt justify the risk.
The tournament had lost its allure. It was no longer worth killing
someone to steal their crack turf, and certainly not worth being killed.
So the violence abated. From 1991 to 2001, the homicide rate
among young black menwho were disproportionately represented
among crack dealersfell 48 percent, compared to 30 percent for
older black men and older white men. (Another minor contributor to
the falling homicide rate is the fact that some crack dealers took to
shooting their enemies in the buttocks rather than murdering them;
this method of violent insult was considered more degradingand
was obviously less severely punishedthan murder.) All told, the
crash of the crack market accounted for roughly 15 percent of the
crime drop of the 1990sa substantial factor, to be sure, though it
should be noted that crack was responsible for far more than 15 percent
of the crime increase of the 1980s. In other words, the net effect
of crack is still being felt in the form of violent crime, to say nothing
of the miseries the drug itself continues to cause.
The final pair of crime-drop explanations concern two demographic
trends. The first one received many media citations: aging of the population.
Until crime fell so drastically, no one talked about this theory at all.
In fact, the bloodbath school of criminology was touting exactly the
opposite theorythat an increase in the teenage share of the population
would produce a crop of superpredators who would lay the nation
low. Just beyond the horizon, there lurks a cloud that the winds
will soon bring over us, James Q. Wilson wrote in 1995. The population
will start getting younger again. . . . Get ready.
1 2 3
FREAKONOMICS
But overall, the teenage share of the population wasnt getting
much bigger. Criminologists like Wilson and James Alan Fox had
badly misread the demographic data. The real population growth in
the 1990s was in fact among the elderly. While this may have been
scary news in terms of Medicare and Social Security, the average
American had little to fear from the growing horde of oldsters. It
shouldnt be surprising to learn that elderly people are not very criminally
intent; the average sixty-five-year-old is about one-fiftieth as
likely to be arrested as the average teenager. That is what makes this
aging-of-the-population theory of crime reduction so appealingly
tidy: since people mellow out as they get older, more older people
must lead to less crime. But a thorough look at the data reveals that
the graying of America did nothing to bring down crime in the 1990s.
Demographic change is too slow and subtle a processyou dont
graduate from teenage hoodlum to senior citizen in just a few years
to even begin to explain the suddenness of the crime decline.
There was another demographic change, however, unforeseen and
long-gestating, that did drastically reduce crime in the 1990s.
Think back for a moment to Romania in 1966. Suddenly and
without warning, Nicolae Ceausescu declared abortion illegal. The
children born in the wake of the abortion ban were much more likely
to become criminals than children born earlier. Why was that? Studies
in other parts of Eastern Europe and in Scandinavia from the
1930s through the 1960s reveal a similar trend. In most of these cases,
abortion was not forbidden outright, but a woman had to receive permission
from a judge in order to obtain one. Researchers found that
in the instances where the woman was denied an abortion, she often
resented her baby and failed to provide it with a good home. Even
when controlling for the income, age, education, and health of the
mother, the researchers found that these children too were more likely
to become criminals.
1 2 4
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
The United States, meanwhile, has had a different abortion history
than Europe. In the early days of the nation, it was permissible to have
an abortion prior to quickeningthat is, when the first movements
of the fetus could be felt, usually around the sixteenth to eighteenth
week of pregnancy. In 1828, New York became the first state to restrict
abortion; by 1900 it had been made illegal throughout the
country. Abortion in the twentieth century was often dangerous and
usually expensive. Fewer poor women, therefore, had abortions. They
also had less access to birth control. What they did have, accordingly,
was a lot more babies.
In the late 1960s, several states began to allow abortion under extreme
circumstances: rape, incest, or danger to the mother. By 1970
five states had made abortion entirely legal and broadly available:
New York, California, Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii. On January
22, 1973, legalized abortion was suddenly extended to the entire
country with the U.S. Supreme Courts ruling in Roe v. Wade. The
majority opinion, written by Justice Harry Blackmun, spoke specifically
to the would-be mothers predicament:
The detriment that the State would impose upon the pregnant
woman by denying this choice altogether is apparent. . . .
Maternity, or additional offspring, may force upon the woman
a distressful life and future. Psychological harm may be imminent.
Mental and physical health may be taxed by child care.
There is also the distress, for all concerned, associated with the
unwanted child, and there is the problem of bringing a child
into a family already unable, psychologically and otherwise, to
care for it.
The Supreme Court gave voice to what the mothers in Romania
and Scandinaviaand elsewherehad long known: when a woman
1 2 5
FREAKONOMICS
does not want to have a child, she usually has good reason. She may be
unmarried or in a bad marriage. She may consider herself too poor to
raise a child. She may think her life is too unstable or unhappy, or she
may think that her drinking or drug use will damage the babys
health. She may believe that she is too young or hasnt yet received
enough education. She may want a child badly but in a few years, not
now. For any of a hundred reasons, she may feel that she cannot provide
a home environment that is conducive to raising a healthy and
productive child.
In the first year after Roe v. Wade, some 750,000 women had abortions
in the United States (representing one abortion for every 4 live
births). By 1980 the number of abortions reached 1.6 million (one
for every 2.25 live births), where it leveled off. In a country of 225
million people, 1.6 million abortions per yearone for every 140
Americansmay not have seemed so dramatic. In the first year after
Nicolae Ceausescus death, when abortion was reinstated in Romania,
there was one abortion for every twenty-two Romanians. But still: 1.6
million American women a year who got pregnant were suddenly not
having those babies.
Before Roe v. Wade, it was predominantly the daughters of middleor
upper-class families who could arrange and afford a safe illegal
abortion. Now, instead of an illegal procedure that might cost $500,
any woman could easily obtain an abortion, often for less than $100.
What sort of woman was most likely to take advantage of Roe
v. Wade? Very often she was unmarried or in her teens or poor, and
sometimes all three. What sort of future might her child have had?
One study has shown that the typical child who went unborn in the
earliest years of legalized abortion would have been 50 percent more
likely than average to live in poverty; he would have also been 60 percent
more likely to grow up with just one parent. These two factors
childhood poverty and a single-parent householdare among the
strongest predictors that a child will have a criminal future. Growing
1 2 6
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
up in a single-parent home roughly doubles a childs propensity to
commit crime. So does having a teenage mother. Another study has
shown that low maternal education is the single most powerful factor
leading to criminality.
In other words, the very factors that drove millions of American
women to have an abortion also seemed to predict that their children,
had they been born, would have led unhappy and possibly criminal
lives.
To be sure, the legalization of abortion in the United States had
myriad consequences. Infanticide fell dramatically. So did shotgun
marriages, as well as the number of babies put up for adoption (which
has led to the boom in the adoption of foreign babies). Conceptions
rose by nearly 30 percent, but births actually fell by 6 percent, indicating
that many women were using abortion as a method of birth
control, a crude and drastic sort of insurance policy.
Perhaps the most dramatic effect of legalized abortion, however,
and one that would take years to reveal itself, was its impact on crime.
In the early 1990s, just as the first cohort of children born after Roe
v. Wade was hitting its late teen yearsthe years during which young
men enter their criminal primethe rate of crime began to fall. What
this cohort was missing, of course, were the children who stood the
greatest chance of becoming criminals. And the crime rate continued
to fall as an entire generation came of age minus the children whose
mothers had not wanted to bring a child into the world. Legalized
abortion led to less unwantedness; unwantedness leads to high crime;
legalized abortion, therefore, led to less crime.
This theory is bound to provoke a variety of reactions, ranging
from disbelief to revulsion, and a variety of objections, ranging from
the quotidian to the moral. The likeliest first objection is the most
straightforward one: is the theory true? Perhaps abortion and crime
are merely correlated and not causal.
It may be more comforting to believe what the newspapers say,
1 2 7
FREAKONOMICS
that the drop in crime was due to brilliant policing and clever gun
control and a surging economy. We have evolved with a tendency to
link causality to things we can touch or feel, not to some distant or
difficult phenomenon. We believe especially in near-term causes: a
snake bites your friend, he screams with pain, and he dies. The
snakebite, you conclude, must have killed him. Most of the time,
such a reckoning is correct. But when it comes to cause and effect,
there is often a trap in such open-and-shut thinking. We smirk now
when we think of ancient cultures that embraced faulty causesthe
warriors who believed, for instance, that it was their raping of a virgin
that brought them victory on the battlefield. But we too embrace
faulty causes, usually at the urging of an expert proclaiming a truth in
which he has a vested interest.
How, then, can we tell if the abortion-crime link is a case of causality
rather than simply correlation?
One way to test the effect of abortion on crime would be to measure
crime data in the five states where abortion was made legal before
the Supreme Court extended abortion rights to the rest of the country.
In New York, California, Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii, a
woman had been able to obtain a legal abortion for at least two years
before Roe v. Wade. And indeed, those early-legalizing states saw crime
begin to fall earlier than the other forty-five states and the District of
Columbia. Between 1988 and 1994, violent crime in the earlylegalizing
states fell 13 percent compared to the other states; between
1994 and 1997, their murder rates fell 23 percent more than those of
the other states.
But what if those early legalizers simply got lucky? What else might
we look for in the data to establish an abortion-crime link?
One factor to look for would be a correlation between each states
abortion rate and its crime rate. Sure enough, the states with the highest
abortion rates in the 1970s experienced the greatest crime drops in
1 2 8
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
the 1990s, while states with low abortion rates experienced smaller
crime drops. (This correlation exists even when controlling for a variety
of factors that influence crime: a states level of incarceration,
number of police, and its economic situation.) Since 1985, states with
high abortion rates have experienced a roughly 30 percent drop in
crime relative to low-abortion states. (New York City had high abortion
rates and lay within an early-legalizing state, a pair of facts that
further dampen the claim that innovative policing caused the crime
drop.) Moreover, there was no link between a given states abortion
rate and its crime rate before the late 1980swhen the first cohort affected
by legalized abortion was reaching its criminal primewhich
is yet another indication that Roe v. Wade was indeed the event that
tipped the crime scale.
There are even more correlations, positive and negative, that shore
up the abortion-crime link. In states with high abortion rates, the entire
decline in crime was among the post-Roe cohort as opposed to
older criminals. Also, studies of Australia and Canada have since established
a similar link between legalized abortion and crime. And the
post-Roe cohort was not only missing thousands of young male criminals
but also thousands of single, teenage mothersfor many of the
aborted baby girls would have been the children most likely to replicate
their own mothers tendencies.
To discover that abortion was one of the greatest crime-lowering
factors in American history is, needless to say, jarring. It feels less
Darwinian than Swiftian; it calls to mind a long-ago dart attributed to
G. K. Chesterton: when there arent enough hats to go around, the
problem isnt solved by lopping off some heads. The crime drop was,
in the language of economists, an unintended benefit of legalized
abortion. But one need not oppose abortion on moral or religious
grounds to feel shaken by the notion of a private sadness being converted
into a public good.
1 2 9
FREAK ONOMIC S
Indeed, there are plenty of people who consider abortion itself to
be a violent crime. One legal scholar called legalized abortion worse
than either slavery (since it routinely involves death) or the Holocaust
(since the number of post-Roe abortions in the United States, roughly
thirty-seven million as of 2004, outnumber the six million Jews killed
in Europe). Whether or not one feels so strongly about abortion, it remains
a singularly charged issue. Anthony V. Bouza, a former top police
official in both the Bronx and Minneapolis, discovered this when
he ran for Minnesota governor in 1994. A few years earlier, Bouza had
written a book in which he called abortion arguably the only effective
crime-prevention device adopted in this nation since the late
1960s. When Bouzas opinion was publicized just before the election,
he fell sharply in the polls. And then he lost.
However a person feels about abortion, a question is likely to come
to mind: what are we to make of the trade-off of more abortion for
less crime? Is it even possible to put a number on such a complicated
transaction?
As it happens, economists have a curious habit of affixing numbers
to complicated transactions. Consider the effort to save the northern
spotted owl from extinction. One economic study found that in order
to protect roughly five thousand owls, the opportunity coststhat is,
the income surrendered by the logging industry and otherswould
be $46 billion, or just over $9 million per owl. After the Exxon Valdez
oil spill in 1989, another study estimated the amount that the typical
American household would be willing to pay to avoid another such
disaster: $31. An economist can affix a value even to a particular body
part. Consider the schedule that the state of Connecticut uses to compensate
for work-related injuries.
LOST OR DAMAGED BODY PART COMPENSATED WEEKS OF PAY
Finger (first) 36
Finger (second) 29
1 3 0
Wh e re Ha ve Al l t h e Cr imi n a l s Go n e?
LOST OR DAMAGED BODY PART COMPENSATED WEEKS OF PAY
Finger (third) 21
Finger (fourth) 17
Thumb (master hand) 63
Thumb (other hand) 54
Hand (master) 168
Hand (other) 155
Arm (master) 208
Arm (other) 194
Toe (great) 28
Toe (any other) 9
Foot 125
Nose 35
Eye 157
Kidney 117
Liver 347
Pancreas 416
Heart 520
Mammary 35
Ovary 35
Testis 35
Penis 35104
Vagina 35104
Now, for the sake of argument, lets ask an outrageous question:
what is the relative value of a fetus and a newborn? If faced with the
Solomonic task of sacrificing the life of one newborn for an indeterminate
number of fetuses, what number might you choose? This is
nothing but a thought exerciseobviously there is no right answer
but it may help clarify the impact of abortion on crime.
For a person who is either resolutely pro-life or resolutely prochoice,
this is a simple calculation. The first, believing that life begins
1 3 1
FREAKONOMICS
at conception, would likely consider the value of a fetus versus the
value of a newborn to be 1:1. The second person, believing that a
womans right to an abortion trumps any other factor, would likely
argue that no number of fetuses can equal even one newborn.
But lets consider a third person. (If you identify strongly with either
person number one or person number two, the following exercise
might strike you as offensive, and you may want to skip this paragraph
and the next.) This third person does not believe that a fetus is
the 1:1 equivalent of a newborn, yet neither does he believe that a
fetus has no relative value. Lets say that he is forced, for the sake of argument,
to affix a relative value, and he decides that 1 newborn is
worth 100 fetuses.
There are roughly 1.5 million abortions in the United States every
year. For a person who believes that 1 newborn is worth 100 fetuses,
those 1.5 million abortions would translatedividing 1.5 million by
100into the equivalent of a loss of 15,000 human lives. Fifteen
thousand lives: that happens to be about the same number of people
who die in homicides in the United States every year. And it is far
more than the number of homicides eliminated each year due to legalized
abortion. So even for someone who considers a fetus to be
worth only one one-hundredth of a human being, the trade-off between
higher abortion and lower crime is, by an economists reckoning,
terribly inefficient.
What the link between abortion and crime does say is this: when
the government gives a woman the opportunity to make her own decision
about abortion, she generally does a good job of figuring out if
she is in a position to raise the baby well. If she decides she cant, she
often chooses the abortion.
But once a woman decides she will have her baby, a pressing question
arises: what are parents supposed to do once a child is born?
1 3 2
5 What Makes a Perfect Parent?
Has there ever been another art so devoutly converted into a science
as the art of parenting?
Over the recent decades, a vast and diverse flock of parenting experts
has arisen. Anyone who tries even casually to follow their advice
may be stymied, for the conventional wisdom on parenting seems to
shift by the hour. Sometimes it is a case of one expert differing from
another. At other times the most vocal experts suddenly agree en
masse that the old wisdom was wrong and that the new wisdom is, for
a little while at least, irrefutably right. Breast feeding, for example, is
the only way to guarantee a healthy and intellectually advanced
childunless bottle feeding is the answer. A baby should always be
put to sleep on her backuntil it is decreed that she should only be
put to sleep on her stomach. Eating liver is either a) toxic or b) imperative
for brain development. Spare the rod and spoil the child; spank
the child and go to jail.
In her book Raising America: Experts, Parents, and a Century of AdFREAKONOMICS
vice About Children, Ann Hulbert documented how parenting experts
contradict one another and even themselves. Their banter might be
hilarious were it not so confounding and, often, scary. Gary Ezzo,
who in the Babywise book series endorses an infant-management
strategy for moms and dads trying to achieve excellence in parenting,
stresses how important it is to train a baby, early on, to sleep
alone through the night. Otherwise, Ezzo warns, sleep deprivation
might negatively impact an infants developing central nervous system
and lead to learning disabilities. Advocates of co-sleeping,
meanwhile, warn that sleeping alone is harmful to a babys psyche
and that he should be brought into the family bed. What about
stimulation? In 1983 T. Berry Brazelton wrote that a baby arrives in
the world beautifully prepared for the role of learning about him- or
herself and the world all around. Brazelton favored early, ardent
stimulationan interactive child. One hundred years earlier, however,
L. Emmett Holt cautioned that a baby is not a plaything.
There should be no forcing, no pressure, no undue stimulation during
the first two years of a childs life, Holt believed; the brain is growing
so much during that time that overstimulation might cause a
great deal of harm. He also believed that a crying baby should never
be picked up unless it is in pain. As Holt explained, a baby should be
left to cry for fifteen to thirty minutes a day: It is the babys exercise.
The typical parenting expert, like experts in other fields, is prone
to sound exceedingly sure of himself. An expert doesnt so much argue
the various sides of an issue as plant his flag firmly on one side. Thats
because an expert whose argument reeks of restraint or nuance often
doesnt get much attention. An expert must be bold if he hopes to alchemize
his homespun theory into conventional wisdom. His best
chance of doing so is to engage the publics emotions, for emotion is
the enemy of rational argument. And as emotions go, one of them
fearis more potent than the rest. The superpredator, Iraqi weapons
1 3 4
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
of mass destruction, mad-cow disease, crib death: how can we fail to
heed the experts advice on these horrors when, like that mean uncle
telling too-scary stories to too-young children, he has reduced us to
quivers?
No one is more susceptible to an experts fearmongering than a
parent. Fear is in fact a major component of the act of parenting. A
parent, after all, is the steward of another creatures life, a creature who
in the beginning is more helpless than the newborn of nearly any
other species. This leads a lot of parents to spend a lot of their parenting
energy simply being scared.
The problem is that they are often scared of the wrong things. Its
not their fault, really. Separating facts from rumors is always hard
work, especially for a busy parent. And the white noise generated by
the expertsto say nothing of the pressure exerted by fellow parents
is so overwhelming that they can barely think for themselves.
The facts they do manage to glean have usually been varnished or exaggerated
or otherwise taken out of context to serve an agenda that
isnt their own.
Consider the parents of an eight-year-old girl named, say, Molly.
Her two best friends, Amy and Imani, each live nearby. Mollys parents
know that Amys parents keep a gun in their house, so they have
forbidden Molly to play there. Instead, Molly spends a lot of time at
Imanis house, which has a swimming pool in the backyard. Mollys
parents feel good about having made such a smart choice to protect
their daughter.
But according to the data, their choice isnt smart at all. In a given
year, there is one drowning of a child for every 11,000 residential
pools in the United States. (In a country with 6 million pools, this
means that roughly 550 children under the age of ten drown each
year.) Meanwhile, there is 1 child killed by a gun for every 1 millionplus
guns. (In a country with an estimated 200 million guns, this
1 3 5
FREAKONOMICS
means that roughly 175 children under ten die each year from guns.)
The likelihood of death by pool (1 in 11,000) versus death by gun (1
in 1 million-plus) isnt even close: Molly is far more likely to die in a
swimming accident at Imanis house than in gunplay at Amys.
But most of us are, like Mollys parents, terrible risk assessors. Peter
Sandman, a self-described risk communications consultant in
Princeton, New Jersey, made this point in early 2004 after a single
case of mad-cow disease in the United States prompted an antibeef
frenzy. The basic reality, Sandman told the New York Times, is that
the risks that scare people and the risks that kill people are very different.
Sandman offered a comparison between mad-cow disease (a superscary
but exceedingly rare threat) and the spread of food-borne
pathogens in the average home kitchen (exceedingly common but
somehow not very scary). Risks that you control are much less a
source of outrage than risks that are out of your control, Sandman
said. In the case of mad-cow, it feels like its beyond my control. I
cant tell if my meat has prions in it or not. I cant see it, I cant smell it.
Whereas dirt in my own kitchen is very much in my own control. I
can clean my sponges. I can clean the floor.
Sandmans control principle might also explain why most people
are more scared of flying in an airplane than driving a car. Their thinking
goes like this: since I control the car, I am the one keeping myself
safe; since I have no control of the airplane, I am at the mercy of myriad
external factors.
So which should we actually fear more, flying or driving?
It might first help to ask a more basic question: what, exactly, are
we afraid of? Death, presumably. But the fear of death needs to be narrowed
down. Of course we all know that we are bound to die, and we
might worry about it casually. But if you are told that you have a 10
percent chance of dying within the next year, you might worry a lot
1 3 6
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
more, perhaps even choosing to live your life differently. And if you
are told that you have 10 percent chance of dying within the next
minute, youll probably panic. So its the imminent possibility of
death that drives the fearwhich means that the most sensible way to
calculate fear of death would be to think about it on a per-hour basis.
If you are taking a trip and have the choice of driving or flying, you
might wish to consider the per-hour death rate of driving versus flying.
It is true that many more people die in the United States each year
in motor vehicle accidents (roughly forty thousand) than in airplane
crashes (fewer than one thousand). But its also true that most people
spend a lot more time in cars than in airplanes. (More people die even
in boating accidents each year than in airplane crashes; as we saw with
swimming pools versus guns, water is a lot more dangerous than most
people think.) The per-hour death rate of driving versus flying, however,
is about equal. The two contraptions are equally likely (or, in
truth, unlikely) to lead to death.
But fear best thrives in the present tense. That is why experts rely
on it; in a world that is increasingly impatient with long-term
processes, fear is a potent short-term play. Imagine that you are a government
official charged with procuring the funds to fight one of two
proven killers: terrorist attacks and heart disease. Which cause do you
think the members of Congress will open up the coffers for? The likelihood
of any given person being killed in a terrorist attack is far
smaller than the likelihood that the same person will clog up his arteries
with fatty food and die of heart disease. But a terrorist attack happens
now; death by heart disease is some distant, quiet catastrophe.
Terrorist acts lie beyond our control; french fries do not. Just as important
as the control factor is what Peter Sandman calls the dread
factor. Death by terrorist attack (or mad-cow disease) is considered
wholly dreadful; death by heart disease is, for some reason, not.
Sandman is an expert who works both sides of the aisle. One day
1 3 7
FREAKONOMICS
he might help a group of environmentalists expose a public health
hazard. His client the next day could be a fast-food CEO trying to
deal with an E. coli outbreak. Sandman has reduced his expertise to a
tidy equation: Risk = hazard + outrage. For the CEO with the bad
hamburger meat, Sandman engages in outrage reduction; for the
environmentalists, its outrage increase.
Note that Sandman addresses the outrage but not the hazard itself.
He concedes that outrage and hazard do not carry equal weight in his
risk equation. When hazard is high and outrage is low, people underreact,
he says. And when hazard is low and outrage is high, they
overreact.
So why is a swimming pool less frightening than a gun? The
thought of a child being shot through the chest with a neighbors gun
is gruesome, dramatic, horrifyingin a word, outrageous. Swimming
pools do not inspire outrage. This is due in part to the familiarity
factor. Just as most people spend more time in cars than in
airplanes, most of us have a lot more experience swimming in pools
than shooting guns. But it takes only about thirty seconds for a child
to drown, and it often happens noiselessly. An infant can drown in
water as shallow as a few inches. The steps to prevent drowning,
meanwhile, are pretty straightforward: a watchful adult, a fence
around the pool, a locked back door so a toddler doesnt slip outside
unnoticed.
If every parent followed these precautions, the lives of perhaps four
hundred young children could be saved each year. That would outnumber
the lives saved by two of the most widely promoted inventions
in recent memory: safer cribs and child car seats. The data show
that car seats are, at best, nominally helpful. It is certainly safer to
keep a child in the rear seat than sitting on a lap in the front seat,
where in the event of an accident he essentially becomes a projectile.
But the safety to be gained here is from preventing the kids from rid-
1 3 8
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
ing shotgun, not from strapping them into a $200 car seat. Nevertheless,
many parents so magnify the benefit of a car seat that they trek to
the local police station or firehouse to have it installed just right.
Theirs is a gesture of love, surely, but also a gesture of what might be
called obsessive parenting. (Obsessive parents know who they are and
are generally proud of the fact; non-obsessive parents also know who
the obsessives are and tend to snicker at them.)
Most innovations in the field of child safety are affiliated with
shock of shocksa new product to be marketed. (Nearly five million
car seats are sold each year.) These products are often a response to
some growing scare in which, as Peter Sandman might put it, the outrage
outweighs the hazard. Compare the four hundred lives that a few
swimming pool precautions might save to the number of lives saved
by far noisier crusades: child-resistant packaging (an estimated fifty
lives a year), flame-retardant pajamas (ten lives), keeping children
away from airbags in cars (fewer than five young children a year have
been killed by airbags since their introduction), and safety drawstrings
on childrens clothing (two lives).
Hold on a minute, you say. What does it matter if parents are manipulated
by experts and marketers? Shouldnt we applaud any effort,
regardless of how minor or manipulative, that makes even one child
safer? Dont parents already have enough to worry about? After all,
parents are responsible for one of the most awesomely important feats
we know: the very shaping of a childs character. Arent they?
The most radical shift of late in the conventional wisdom on parenting
has been provoked by one simple question: how much do parents
really matter?
Clearly, bad parenting matters a great deal. As the link between
abortion and crime makes clear, unwanted childrenwho are dispro-
1 3 9
FREAKONOMICS
portionately subject to neglect and abusehave worse outcomes
than children who were eagerly welcomed by their parents. But how
much can those eager parents actually accomplish for their childrens
sake?
This question represents a crescendo of decades worth of research.
A long line of studies, including research into twins who were separated
at birth, had already concluded that genes alone are responsible
for perhaps 50 percent of a childs personality and abilities.
So if nature accounts for half of a childs destiny, what accounts for
the other half? Surely it must be the nurturingthe Baby Mozart
tapes, the church sermons, the museum trips, the French lessons, the
bargaining and hugging and quarreling and punishing that, in toto,
constitute the act of parenting. But how then to explain another famous
study, the Colorado Adoption Project, which followed the lives
of 245 babies put up for adoption and found virtually no correlation
between the childs personality traits and those of his adopted parents?
Or the other studies showing that a childs character wasnt
much affected whether or not he was sent to day care, whether he had
one parent or two, whether his mother worked or didnt, whether he
had two mommies or two daddies or one of each?
These nature-nurture discrepancies were addressed in a 1998 book
by a little-known textbook author named Judith Rich Harris. The
Nurture Assumption was in effect an attack on obsessive parenting, a
book so provocative that it required two subtitles: Why Children Turn
Out the Way They Do and Parents Matter Less than You Think and Peers
Matter More. Harris argued, albeit gently, that parents are wrong to
think they contribute so mightily to their childs personality. This belief,
she wrote, was a cultural myth. Harris argued that the topdown
influence of parents is overwhelmed by the grassroots effect of
peer pressure, the blunt force applied each day by friends and schoolmates.
The unlikeliness of Harriss bombshellshe was a grandmother,
140
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
no less, without PhD or academic affiliationprompted both wonder
and chagrin. The public may be forgiven for saying, Here we go
again,  wrote one reviewer. One year were told bonding is the key,
the next that its birth order. Wait, what really matters is stimulation.
The first five years of life are the most important; no, the first three
years; no, its all over by the first year. Forget that: Its all genetics!
But Harriss theory was duly endorsed by a slate of heavyweights.
Among them was Steven Pinker, the cognitive psychologist and bestselling
author, who in his own book Blank Slate called Harriss views
mind-boggling (in a good way). Patients in traditional forms of
psychotherapy while away their fifty minutes reliving childhood conflicts
and learning to blame their unhappiness on how their parents
treated them, Pinker wrote. Many biographies scavenge through
the subjects childhood for the roots of the grown-ups tragedies and
triumphs. Parenting experts make women feel like ogres if they slip
out of the house to work or skip a reading of Goodnight Moon. All
these deeply held beliefs will have to be rethought.
Or will they? Parents must matter, you tell yourself. Besides, even if
peers exert so much influence on a child, isnt it the parents who essentially
choose a childs peers? Isnt that why parents agonize over the
right neighborhood, the right school, the right circle of friends?
Still, the question of how much parents matter is a good one. It is
also terribly complicated. In determining a parents influence, which
dimension of the child are we measuring: his personality? his school
grades? his moral behavior? his creative abilities? his salary as an adult?
And what weight should we assign each of the many inputs that affect
a childs outcome: genes, family environment, socioeconomic level,
schooling, discrimination, luck, illness, and so on?
For the sake of argument, lets consider the story of two boys, one
white and one black.
The white boy is raised in a Chicago suburb by parents who read
widely and involve themselves in school reform. His father, who has a
1 4 1
FREAKONOMICS
decent manufacturing job, often takes the boy on nature hikes. His
mother is a housewife who will eventually go back to college and earn
a bachelors degree in education. The boy is happy and performs very
well in school. His teachers think he may be a bona fide math genius.
His parents encourage him and are terribly proud when he skips a
grade. He has an adoring younger brother who is also very bright. The
family even holds literary salons in their home.
The black boy is born in Daytona Beach, Florida, and his mother
abandons him at the age of two. His father has a good job in sales but
is a heavy drinker. He often beats the little boy with the metal end of
a garden hose. One night when the boy is eleven, he is decorating a
tabletop Christmas treethe first one he has ever hadwhen his father
starts beating up a lady friend in the kitchen. He hits her so hard
that some teeth fly out of her mouth and land at the base of the boys
Christmas tree, but the boy knows better than to speak up. At school
he makes no effort whatsoever. Before long he is selling drugs, mugging
suburbanites, carrying a gun. He makes sure to be asleep by the
time his father comes home from drinking, and to be out of the house
before his father awakes. The father eventually goes to jail for sexual
assault. By the age of twelve, the boy is essentially fending for himself.
You dont have to believe in obsessive parenting to think that the
second boy doesnt stand a chance and that the first boy has it made.
What are the odds that the second boy, with the added handicap of
racial discrimination, will turn out to lead a productive life? What are
the odds that the first boy, so deftly primed for success, will somehow
fail? And how much of his fate should each boy attribute to his parents?
One could theorize forever about what makes the perfect parent. For
two reasons, the authors of this book will not do so. The first is that
1 4 2
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
neither of us professes to be a parenting expert (although between
us we do have six children under the age of five). The second is that
we are less persuaded by parenting theory than by what the data have
to say.
Certain facets of a childs outcomepersonality, for instance, or
creativityare not easily measured by data. But school performance
is. And since most parents would agree that education lies at the core
of a childs formation, it would make sense to begin by examining a
telling set of school data.
These data concern school choice, an issue that most people feel
strongly about in one direction or another. True believers of school
choice argue that their tax dollars buy them the right to send their
children to the best school possible. Critics worry that school choice
will leave behind the worst students in the worst schools. Still, just
about every parent seems to believe that her child will thrive if only he
can attend the right school, the one with an appropriate blend of academics,
extracurriculars, friendliness, and safety.
School choice came early to the Chicago Public School system.
Thats because the CPS, like most urban school districts, had a disproportionate
number of minority students. Despite the U.S. Supreme
Courts 1954 ruling in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka,
which dictated that schools be desegregated, many black CPS students
continued to attend schools that were nearly all-black. So in
1980 the U.S. Department of Justice and the Chicago Board of Education
teamed up to try to better integrate the citys schools. It was decreed
that incoming freshmen could apply to virtually any high
school in the district.
Aside from its longevity, there are several reasons the CPS schoolchoice
program is a good one to study. It offers a huge data set
Chicago has the third-largest school system in the country, after New
York and Los Angelesas well as an enormous amount of choice
1 4 3
FREAKONOMICS
(more than sixty high schools) and flexibility. Its take-up rates are accordingly
very high, with roughly half of the CPS students opting
out of their neighborhood school. But the most serendipitous aspect
of the CPS programfor the sake of a study, at leastis how the
school-choice game was played.
As might be expected, throwing open the doors of any school to
every freshman in Chicago threatened to create bedlam. The schools
with good test scores and high graduation rates would be rabidly oversubscribed,
making it impossible to satisfy every students request.
In the interest of fairness, the CPS resorted to a lottery. For a researcher,
this is a remarkable boon. A behavioral scientist could hardly
design a better experiment in his laboratory. Just as the scientist might
randomly assign one mouse to a treatment group and another to a
control group, the Chicago school board effectively did the same.
Imagine two students, statistically identical, each of whom wants to
attend a new, better school. Thanks to how the ball bounces in the
hopper, one student goes to the new school and the other stays behind.
Now imagine multiplying those students by the thousands.
The result is a natural experiment on a grand scale. This was hardly
the goal in the mind of the Chicago school officials who conceived the
lottery. But when viewed in this way, the lottery offers a wonderful
means of measuring just how much school choiceor, really, a better
schooltruly matters.
So what do the data reveal?
The answer will not be heartening to obsessive parents: in this case,
school choice barely mattered at all. It is true that the Chicago students
who entered the school-choice lottery were more likely to graduate
than the students who didntwhich seems to suggest that
school choice does make a difference. But thats an illusion. The proof
is in this comparison: the students who won the lottery and went to a
better school did no better than equivalent students who lost the
144
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
lottery and were left behind. That is, a student who opted out of his
neighborhood school was more likely to graduate whether or not he
actually won the opportunity to go to a new school. What appears to
be an advantage gained by going to a new school isnt connected
to the new school at all. What this means is that the studentsand
parentswho choose to opt out tend to be smarter and more academically
motivated to begin with. But statistically, they gained no
academic benefit by changing schools.
And is it true that the students left behind in neighborhood
schools suffered? No: they continued to test at about the same levels as
before the supposed brain drain.
There was, however, one group of students in Chicago who did see
a dramatic change: those who entered a technical school or career
academy. These students performed substantially better than they did
in their old academic settings and graduated at a much higher rate
than their past performance would have predicted. So the CPS
school-choice program did help prepare a small segment of otherwise
struggling students for solid careers by giving them practical skills.
But it doesnt appear that it made anyone much smarter.
Could it really be that school choice doesnt much matter? No selfrespecting
parent, obsessive or otherwise, is ready to believe that. But
wait: maybe its because the CPS study measures high-school students;
maybe by then the die has already been cast. There are too
many students who arrive at high school not prepared to do high
school work, Richard P. Mills, the education commissioner of New
York State, noted recently, too many students who arrive at high
school reading, writing, and doing math at the elementary level. We
have to correct the problem in the earlier grades.
Indeed, academic studies have substantiated Millss anxiety. In examining
the income gap between black and white adultsit is well
established that blacks earn significantly lessscholars have found
145
FREAKONOMICS
that the gap is virtually eradicated if the blacks lower eighth-grade
test scores are taken into account. In other words, the black-white income
gap is largely a product of a black-white education gap that
could have been observed many years earlier. Reducing the blackwhite
test score gap, wrote the authors of one study, would do more
to promote racial equality than any other strategy that commands
broad political support.
So where does that black-white test gap come from? Many theories
have been put forth over the years: poverty, genetic makeup, the summer
setback phenomenon (blacks are thought to lose more ground
than whites when school is out of session), racial bias in testing or in
teachers perceptions, and a black backlash against acting white.
In a paper called The Economics of Acting White,  the young
black Harvard economist Roland G. Fryer Jr. argues that some black
students have tremendous disincentives to invest in particular behaviors
(i.e., education, ballet, etc.) due to the fact that they may
be deemed a person who is trying to act like a white person (a.k.a.
selling-out). Such a label, in some neighborhoods, can carry penalties
that range from being deemed a social outcast, to being beaten or
killed. Fryer cites the recollections of a young Kareem Abdul-Jabbar,
known then as Lew Alcindor, who had just entered the fourth grade
in a new school and discovered that he was a better reader than
even the seventh graders: When the kids found this out, I became a
target. . . . It was my first time away from home, my first experience
in an all-black situation, and I found myself being punished for
everything Id ever been taught was right. I got all As and was hated
for it; I spoke correctly and was called a punk. I had to learn a new language
simply to be able to deal with the threats. I had good manners
and was a good little boy and paid for it with my hide.
Fryer is also one of the authors of Understanding the Black-
White Test Score Gap in the First Two Years of School. This paper
146
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
takes advantage of a new trove of government data that helps reliably
address the black-white gap. Perhaps more interestingly, the data do a
nice job of answering the question that every parentblack, white,
and otherwisewants to ask: what are the factors that do and do not
affect a childs performance in the early school years?
In the late 1990s, the U.S. Department of Education undertook a
monumental project called the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study.
The ECLS sought to measure the academic progress of more than
twenty thousand children from kindergarten through the fifth grade.
The subjects were chosen from across the country to represent an accurate
cross section of American schoolchildren.
The ECLS measured the students academic performance and
gathered typical survey information about each child: his or her race,
gender, family structure, socioeconomic status, the level of his or her
parents education, and so on. But the study went well beyond these
basics. It also included interviews with the students parents (and
teachers and school administrators), posing a long list of questions
more intimate than those in the typical government interview:
whether the parents spanked their children, and how often; whether
they took them to libraries or museums; how much television the
children watched.
The result is an incredibly rich set of datawhich, if the right
questions are asked of it, tells some surprising stories.
How can this type of data be made to tell a reliable story? By subjecting
it to the economists favorite trick: regression analysis. No, regression
analysis is not some forgotten form of psychiatric treatment.
It is a powerfulif limitedtool that uses statistical techniques to
identify otherwise elusive correlations.
Correlation is nothing more than a statistical term that indicates
1 4 7
FREAKONOMICS
whether two variables move together. It tends to be cold outside when
it snows; those two factors are positively correlated. Sunshine and
rain, meanwhile, are negatively correlated. Easy enoughas long as
there are only a couple of variables. But with a couple of hundred variables,
things get harder. Regression analysis is the tool that enables an
economist to sort out these huge piles of data. It does so by artificially
holding constant every variable except the two he wishes to focus on,
and then showing how those two co-vary.
In a perfect world, an economist could run a controlled experiment
just as a physicist or a biologist does: setting up two samples,
randomly manipulating one of them, and measuring the effect. But
an economist rarely has the luxury of such pure experimentation.
(Thats why the school-choice lottery in Chicago was such a happy accident.)
What an economist typically has is a data set with a great
many variables, none of them randomly generated, some related and
others not. From this jumble, he must determine which factors are
correlated and which are not.
In the case of the ECLS data, it might help to think of regression
analysis as performing the following task: converting each of those
twenty thousand schoolchildren into a sort of circuit board with an
identical number of switches. Each switch represents a single category
of the childs data: his first-grade math score, his third-grade math
score, his first-grade reading score, his third-grade reading score, his
mothers education level, his fathers income, the number of books in
his home, the relative affluence of his neighborhood, and so on.
Now a researcher is able to tease some insights from this very complicated
set of data. He can line up all the children who share many
characteristicsall the circuit boards that have their switches flipped
the same directionand then pinpoint the single characteristic they
dont share. This is how he isolates the true impact of that single switch
on the sprawling circuit board. This is how the effect of that switch
and, eventually, of every switchbecomes manifest.
148
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
Lets say that we want to ask the ECLS data a fundamental question
about parenting and education: does having a lot of books in
your home lead your child to do well in school? Regression analysis
cant quite answer that question, but it can answer a subtly different
one: does a child with a lot of books in his home tend to do better
than a child with no books? The difference between the first and second
questions is the difference between causality (question 1) and
correlation (question 2). A regression analysis can demonstrate correlation,
but it doesnt prove cause. After all, there are several ways in
which two variables can be correlated. X can cause Y; Y can cause X; or
it may be that some other factor is causing both X and Y. A regression
alone cant tell you whether it snows because its cold, whether its cold
because it snows, or if the two just happen to go together.
The ECLS data do show, for instance, that a child with a lot of
books in his home tends to test higher than a child with no books. So
those factors are correlated, and thats nice to know. But higher test
scores are correlated with many other factors as well. If you simply
measure children with a lot of books against children with no books,
the answer may not be very meaningful. Perhaps the number of
books in a childs home merely indicates how much money his parents
make. What we really want to do is measure two children who are
alike in every way except onein this case, the number of books in
their homesand see if that one factor makes a difference in their
school performance.
It should be said that regression analysis is more art than science.
(In this regard, it has a great deal in common with parenting itself.)
But a skilled practitioner can use it to tell how meaningful a correlation
isand maybe even tell whether that correlation does indicate a
causal relationship.
So what does an analysis of the ECLS data tell us about schoolchildrens
performance? A number of things. The first one concerns
the black-white test score gap.
149
FREAKONOMICS
It has long been observed that black children, even before they set
foot in a classroom, underperform their white counterparts. Moreover,
black children didnt measure up even when controlling for a
wide array of variables. (To control for a variable is essentially to eliminate
its influence, much as one golfer uses a handicap against another.
In the case of an academic study such as the ECLS, a researcher
might control for any number of disadvantages that one student
might carry when measured against the average student.) But this
new data set tells a different story. After controlling for just a few
variablesincluding the income and education level of the childs
parents and the mothers age at the birth of her first childthe gap
between black and white children is virtually eliminated at the time
the children enter school.
This is an encouraging finding on two fronts. It means that young
black children have continued to make gains relative to their white
counterparts. It also means that whatever gap remains can be linked to
a handful of readily identifiable factors. The data reveal that black
children who perform poorly in school do so not because they are
black but because a black child is more likely to come from a lowincome,
low-education household. A typical black child and white
child from the same socioeconomic background, however, have the
same abilities in math and reading upon entering kindergarten.
Great news, right? Well, not so fast. First of all, because the average
black child is more likely to come from a low-income, low-education
household, the gap is very real: on average, black children still are
scoring worse. Worse yet, even when the parents income and education
are controlled for, the black-white gap reappears within just two
years of a childs entering school. By the end of first grade, a black
child is underperforming a statistically equivalent white child. And
the gap steadily grows over the second and third grades.
Why does this happen? Thats a hard, complicated question. But
150
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
one answer may lie in the fact that the school attended by the typical
black child is not the same school attended by the typical white child,
and the typical black child goes to a school that is simply . . . bad.
Even fifty years after Brown v. Board, many American schools are virtually
segregated. The ECLS project surveyed roughly one thousand
schools, taking samples of twenty children from each. In 35 percent
of those schools, not a single black child was included in the sample.
The typical white child in the ECLS study attends a school that is
only 6 percent black; the typical black child, meanwhile, attends a
school that is about 60 percent black.
Just how are the black schools bad? Not, interestingly, in the ways
that schools are traditionally measured. In terms of class size, teachers
education, and computer-to-student ratio, the schools attended by
blacks and whites are similar. But the typical black students school
has a far higher rate of troublesome indicators, such as gang problems,
nonstudents loitering in front of the school, and lack of PTA funding.
These schools offer an environment that is simply not conducive to
learning.
Black students are hardly the only ones who suffer in bad schools.
White children in these schools also perform poorly. In fact, there is
essentially no black-white test score gap within a bad school in the
early years once you control for students backgrounds. But all students
in a bad school, black and white, do lose ground to students in
good schools. Perhaps educators and researchers are wrong to be so
hung up on the black-white test score gap; the bad-school/goodschool
gap may be the more salient issue. Consider this fact: the
ECLS data reveal that black students in good schools dont lose
ground to their white counterparts, and black students in good
schools outperform whites in poor schools.
So according to these data, a childs school does seem to have a
clear impact on his academic progress, at least in the early years. Can
1 5 1
FREAKONOMICS
the same be said for parenting? Did all those Baby Mozart tapes
pay off? What about those marathon readings of Goodnight Moon?
Was the move to the suburbs worthwhile? Do the kids with PTA
parents do better than the kids whose parents have never heard of
the PTA?
The wide-ranging ECLS data offer a number of compelling correlations
between a childs personal circumstances and his school performance.
For instance, once all other factors are controlled for, it is clear
that students from rural areas tend to do worse than average. Suburban
children, meanwhile, are in the middle of the curve, while urban
children tend to score higher than average. (It may be that cities attract
a more educated workforce and, therefore, parents with smarter
children.) On average, girls test higher than boys, and Asians test
higher than whitesalthough blacks, as we have already established,
test similarly to whites from comparable backgrounds and in comparable
schools.
Knowing what you now know about regression analysis, conventional
wisdom, and the art of parenting, consider the following list
of sixteen factors. According to the ECLS data, eight of the factors
show a strong correlationpositive or negativewith test scores.
The other eight dont seem to matter. Feel free to guess which are
which. Keep in mind that these results reflect only a childs early test
scores, a useful but fairly narrow measurement; poor testing in early
childhood isnt necessarily a great harbinger of future earnings, creativity,
or happiness.
The child has highly educated parents.
The childs family is intact.
The childs parents have high socioeconomic status.
1 5 2
Wh a t Ma ke s a Pe r fe c t Pa re n t?
The childs parents recently moved into a better neighborhood.
The childs mother was thirty or older at the time of her first
childs birth.
The childs mother didnt work between birth and kindergarten.
The child had low birthweight.
The child attended Head Start.
The childs parents speak English in the home.
The childs parents regularly take him to museums.
The child is adopted.
The child is regularly spanked.
The childs parents are involved in the PTA.
The child frequently watches television.
The child has many books in his home.
The childs parents read to him nearly every day.
Here now are the eight factors that are strongly correlated with test
scores:
The child has highly educated parents.
The childs parents have high socioeconomic status.
The childs mother was thirty or older at the time of her first
childs birth.
The child had low birthweight.
The childs parents speak English in the home.
The child is adopted.
The childs parents are involved in the PTA.
The child has many books in his home.
And the eight that