

HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone
Harry Potter
& The Sorcerers Stone
by J.K. Rowling
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER ONE
THE BOY WHO LIVED
M r. and Mrs. Dursley, of number four, Privet Drive, were proud to say
that they were perfectly normal, thank you very much. They were the last people
youd expect to be involved in anything strange or mysterious, because they just
didnt hold with such nonsense.
Mr. Dursley was the director of a firm called Grunnings, which made
drills. He was a big, beefy man with hardly any neck, although he did have a
very large mustache. Mrs. Dursley was thin and blonde and had nearly twice the
usual amount of neck, which came in very useful as she spent so much of her
time craning over garden fences, spying on the neighbors. The Dursleys had a
small son called Dudley and in their opinion there was no finer boy anywhere.
The Dursleys had everything they wanted, but they also had a secret, and
their greatest fear was that somebody would discover it. They didnt think they
could bear it if anyone found out about the Potters. Mrs. Potter was Mrs.
Dursleys sister, but they hadnt met for several years; in fact, Mrs. Dursley
pretended she didnt have a sister, because her sister and her good-for-nothing
husband were as unDursleyish as it was possible to be. The Dursleys shuddered
to think what the neighbors would say if the Potters arrived in the street. The
Dursleys knew that the Potters had a small son, too, but they had never even
seen him. This boy was another good reason for keeping the Potters away; they
didnt want Dudley mixing with a child like that.
When Mr. and Mrs. Dursley woke up on the dull, gray Tuesday our story
starts, there was nothing about the cloudy sky outside to suggest that strange and
mysterious things would soon be happening all over the country. Mr. Dursley
hummed as he picked out his most boring tie for work, and Mrs. Dursley
gossiped away happily as she wrestled a screaming Dudley into his high chair.
None of them noticed a large, tawny owl flutter past the window.
At half past eight, Mr. Dursley picked up his briefcase, pecked Mrs.
Dursley on the cheek, and tried to kiss Dudley good-bye but missed, because
Dudley was now having a tantrum and throwing his cereal at the walls.
Little tyke, chortled Mr. Dursley as he left the house. He got into his car
and backed out of number fours drive.
It was on the corner of the street that he noticed the first sign of
something peculiar  a cat reading a map. For a second, Mr. Dursley didnt
realize what he had seen  then he jerked his head around to look again. There
was a tabby cat standing on the corner of Privet Drive, but there wasnt a map in
sight. What could he have been thinking of? It must have been a trick of the
light. Mr. Dursley blinked and stared at the cat. It stared back. As Mr. Dursley
drove around the corner and up the road, he watched the cat in his mirror. It was
now reading the sign that said Privet Drive  no, looking at the sign; cats
couldnt read maps or signs. Mr. Dursley gave himself a little shake and put the
cat out of his mind. As he drove toward town he thought of nothing except a
large order of drills he was hoping to get that day.
But on the edge of town, drills were driven out of his mind by something
else. As he sat in the usual morning traffic jam, he couldnt help noticing that
there seemed to be a lot of strangely dressed people about. People in cloaks. Mr.
Dursley couldnt bear people who dressed in funny clothes  the getups you
saw on young people! He supposed this was some stupid new fashion. He
drummed his fingers on the steering wheel and his eyes fell on a huddle of these
weirdos standing quite close by. They were whispering excitedly together. Mr.
Dursley was enraged to see that a couple of them werent young at all; why, that
man had to be older than he was, and wearing an emerald-green cloak! The
nerve of him! But then it struck Mr. Dursley that this was probably some silly
stunt these people were obviously collecting for somethingyes, that would
be it. The traffic moved on and a few minutes later, Mr. Dursley arrived in the
Grunnings parking lot, his mind back on drills.
Mr. Dursley always sat with his back to the window in his office on the
ninth floor. If he hadnt, he might have found it harder to concentrate on drills
that morning. He didnt see the owls swooping past in broad daylight, though
people down in the street did; they pointed and gazed open-mouthed as owl after
owl sped overhead. Most of them had never seen an owl even at nighttime. Mr.
Dursley, however, had a perfectly normal, owl-free morning. He yelled at five
different people. He made several important telephone calls and shouted a bit
more. He was in a very good mood until lunchtime, when he thought hed stretch
his legs and walk across the road to buy himself a bun from the bakery.
Hed for gotten all about the people in cloaks until he passed a group of
them next to the bakers. He eyed them angrily as he passed. He didnt know
why, but they made him uneasy. This bunch were whispering excitedly, too, and
he couldnt see a single collecting tin. It was on his way back past them,
clutching a large doughnut in a bag, that he caught a few words of what they
were saying.
The Potters, thats right, thats what I heard 
  yes, their son, Harry 
Mr. Dursley stopped dead. Fear flooded him. He looked back at the
whisperers as if he wanted to say something to them, but thought better of it.
He dashed back across the road, hurried up to his office, snapped at his
secretary not to disturb him, seized his telephone, and had almost finished
dialing his home number when he changed his mind. He put the receiver back
down and stroked his mustache, thinkingno, he was being stupid. Potter
wasnt such an unusual name. He was sure there were lots of people called Potter
who had a son called Harry. Come to think of it, he wasnt even sure his nephew
was called Harry. Hed never even seen the boy. It might have been Harvey. Or
Harold. There was no point in worrying Mrs. Dursley; she always got so upset at
any mention of her sister. He didnt blame her  if hed had a sister like that
but all the same, those people in cloaks.
He found it a lot harder to concentrate on drills that afternoon and when
he left the building at five oclock, he was still so worried that he walked straight
into someone just outside the door.
Sorry, he grunted, as the tiny old man stumbled and almost fell. It was
a few seconds before Mr. Dursley realized that the man was wearing a violet
cloak. He didnt seem at all upset at being almost knocked to the ground. On the
contrary, his face split into a wide smile and he said in a squeaky voice that made
passersby stare, Dont be sorry, my dear sir, for nothing could upset me today!
Rejoice, for You-Know-Who has gone at last! Even Muggles like yourself
should be celebrating, this happy, happy day!
And the old man hugged Mr. Dursley around the middle and walked off.
Mr. Dursley stood rooted to the spot. He had been hugged by a complete
stranger. He also thought he had been called a Muggle, whatever that was. He
was rattled. He hurried to his car and set off for home, hoping he was imagining
things, which he had never hoped before, because he didnt approve of
imagination.
As he pulled into the driveway of number four, the first thing he saw 
and it didnt improve his mood  was the tabby cat hed spotted that morning. It
was now sitting on his garden wall. He was sure it was the same one; it had the
same markings around its eyes.
Shoo! said Mr. Dursley loudly.
The cat didnt move. It just gave him a stern look. Was this normal cat
behavior? Mr. Dursley wondered. Trying to pull himself together, he let himself
into the house. He was still determined not to mention anything to his wife.
Mrs. Dursley had had a nice, normal day. She told him over dinner all
about Mrs. Next Doors problems with her daughter and how Dudley had
learned a new word (Wont!). Mr. Dursley tried to act normally. When Dudley
had been put to bed, he went into the living room in time to catch the last report
on the evening news:
And finally, bird-watchers everywhere have reported that the nations
owls have been behaving very unusually today. Although owls normally hunt at
night and are hardly ever seen in daylight, there have been hundreds of sightings
of these birds flying in every direction since sunrise. Experts are unable to
explain why the owls have suddenly changed their sleeping pattern. The
newscaster allowed himself a grin. Most mysterious. And now, over to Jim
McGuffin with the weather. Going to be any more showers of owls tonight,
Jim?
Well, Ted, said the weatherman, I dont know about that, but its not
only the owls that have been acting oddly today. Viewers as far apart as Kent,
Yorkshire, and Dundee have been phoning in to tell me that instead of the rain I
promised yesterday, theyve had a downpour of shooting stars! Perhaps people
have been celebrating Bonfire Night early  its not until next week, folks! But
I can promise a wet night tonight.
Mr. Dursley sat frozen in his armchair. Shooting stars all over Britain?
Owls flying by daylight? Mysterious people in cloaks all over the place? And a
whisper, a whisper about the Potters.
Mrs. Dursley came into the living room carrying two cups of tea. It was
no good. Hed have to say something to her. He cleared his throat nervously. Er
 Petunia, dear  you havent heard from your sister lately, have you?
As he had expected, Mrs. Dursley looked shocked and angry. After all,
they normally pretended she didnt have a sister.
No, she said sharply. Why?
Funny stuff on the news, Mr. Dursley mumbled. Owlsshooting
starsand there were a lot of funny-looking people in town today.
So? snapped Mrs. Dursley.
Well, I just thoughtmaybeit was something to do withyou
knowher crowd.
Mrs. Dursley sipped her tea through pursed lips. Mr. Dursley wondered
whether he dared tell her hed heard the name Potter. He decided he didnt
dare. Instead he said, as casually as he could, Their son  hed be about
Dudleys age now, wouldnt he?
I suppose so, said Mrs. Dursley stiffly.
Whats his name again? Howard, isnt it?
Harry. Nasty, common name, if you ask me.
Oh, yes, said Mr. Dursley, his heart sinking horribly. Yes, I quite
agree.
He didnt say another word on the subject as they went upstairs to bed.
While Mrs. Dursley was in the bathroom, Mr. Dursley crept to the bedroom
window and peered down into the front garden. The cat was still there. It was
staring down Privet Drive as though it were waiting for something.
Was he imagining things? Could all this have anything to do with the
Potters? If it did...if it got out that they were related to a pair of  well, he didnt
think he could bear it.
The Dursleys got into bed. Mrs. Dursley fell asleep quickly but Mr.
Dursley lay awake, turning it all over in his mind. His last, comforting thought
before he fell asleep was that even if the Potters were involved, there was no
reason for them to come near him and Mrs. Dursley. The Potters knew very well
what he and Petunia thought about them and their kind....He couldnt see how he
and Petunia could get mixed up in anything that might be going on  he
yawned and turned over  it couldnt affect them.
How very wrong he was.
Mr. Dursley might have been drifting into an uneasy sleep, but the cat on
the wall outside was showing no sign of sleepiness. It was sitting as still as a
statue, its eyes fixed unblinkingly on the far corner of Privet Drive. It didnt so
much as quiver when a car door slammed on the next street, nor when two owls
swooped overhead. In fact, it was nearly midnight before the cat moved at all.
A man appeared on the corner the cat had been watching, appeared so
suddenly and silently youd have thought hed just popped out of the ground.
The cats tail twitched and its eyes narrowed.
Nothing like this man had ever been seen on Privet Drive. He was tall,
thin, and very old, judging by the silver of his hair and beard, which were both
long enough to tuck into his belt. He was wearing long robes, a purple cloak that
swept the ground, and high-heeled, buckled boots. His blue eyes were light,
bright, and sparkling behind half-moon spectacles and his nose was very long
and crooked, as though it had been broken at least twice. This mans name was
Albus Dumbledore.
Albus Dumbledore didnt seem to realize that he had just arrived in a
street where everything from his name to his boots was unwelcome. He was
busy rummaging in his cloak, looking for something. But he did seem to realize
he was being watched, because he looked up suddenly at the cat, which was still
staring at him from the other end of the street. For some reason, the sight of the
cat seemed to amuse him. He chuckled and muttered, I should have known.
He found what he was looking for in his inside pocket. It seemed to be a
silver cigarette lighter. He flicked it open, held it up in the air, and clicked it. The
nearest street lamp went out with a little pop. He clicked it again  the next
lamp flickered into darkness. Twelve times he clicked the Put-Outer, until the
only lights left on the whole street were two tiny pinpricks in the distance, which
were the eyes of the cat watching him. If anyone looked out of their window
now, even beady-eyed Mrs. Dursley, they wouldnt be able to see anything that
was happening down on the pavement. Dumbledore slipped the Put-Outer back
inside his cloak and set off down the street toward number four, where he sat
down on the wall next to the cat. He didnt look at it, but after a moment he
spoke to it.
Fancy seeing you here, Professor McGonagall.
He turned to smile at the tabby, but it had gone. Instead he was smiling at
a rather severe-looking woman who was wearing square glasses exactly the
shape of the markings the cat had had around its eyes. She, too, was wearing a
cloak, an emerald one. Her black hair was drawn into a tight bun. She looked
distinctly ruffled.
How did you know it was me? she asked.
My dear Professor, Ive never seen a cat sit so stiffly.
Youd be stiff if youd been sitting on a brick wall all day, said
Professor McGonagall.
All day? When you could have been celebrating? I must have passed a
dozen feasts and parties on my way here.
Professor McGonagall sniffed angrily.
Oh yes, Ive celebrating, all right, she said impatiently. Youd think
theyd be a bit more careful, but no even the Muggles have noticed
somethings going on. It was on their news. She jerked her head back at the
Dursleys dark living-room window. I heard it. Flocks of owlsshooting
starsWell, theyre not completely stupid. They were bound to notice
something. Shooting stars down in Kent  Ill bet that was Dedalus Diggle. He
never had much sense.
You cant blame them, said Dumbledore gently. Weve had precious
little to celebrate for eleven years.
I know that, said Professor McGonagall irritably. But thats no reason
to lose our heads. People are being downright careless, out on the streets in
broad daylight, not even dressed in Muggle clothes, swapping rumors.
She threw a sharp, sideways glance at Dumbledore here, as though
hoping he was going to tell her something, but he didnt, so she went on. A fine
thing it would be if, on the very day You-Know-Who seems to have disappeared
at last, the Muggles found out about us all. I suppose he really has gone,
Dumbledore?
It certainly seems so, said Dumbledore. We have much to be thankful
for. Would you care for a lemon drop?
A what?
A lemon drop. Theyre a kind of Muggle sweet Im rather fond of.
No, thank you, said Professor McGonagall coldly, as though she didnt
think this was the moment for lemon drops. As I say, even if You-Know-Who
has gone 
My dear Professor, surely a sensible person like yourself can call him by
his name? All this You-Know-Who nonsense  for eleven years I have been
trying to persuade people to call him by his proper name: Voldemort. Professor
McGonagall flinched, but Dumbledore, who was unsticking two lemon drops,
seemed not to notice. It all gets so confusing if we keep saying You-Know-
Who. I have never seen any reason to be frightened of saying Voldemorts
name.
I know you havent, said Professor McGonagall, sounding half
exasperated, half admiring. But youre different. Everyone knows youre the
only one You-Know- oh, all right, Voldemort, was frightened of.
You flatter me, said Dumbledore calmly. Voldemort had powers I will
never have.
Only because youre too  well  noble to use them.
Its lucky its dark. I havent blushed so much since Madam Pomfrey
told me she liked my new earmuffs.
Professor McGonagall shot a sharp look at Dumbledore and said The
owls are nothing next to the rumors that are flying around. You know what
theyre saying? About why hes disappeared? About what finally stopped him?
It seemed that Professor McGonagall had reached the point she was most
anxious to discuss, the real reason she had been waiting on a cold, hard wall all
day, for neither as a cat nor as a woman had she fixed Dumbledore with such a
piercing stare as she did now. It was plain that whatever everyone was saying,
she was not going to believe it until Dumbledore told her it was true.
Dumbledore, however, was choosing another lemon drop and did not answer.
What theyre saying, she pressed on, is that last night Voldemort
turned up in Godrics Hollow. He went to find the Potters. The rumor is that Lily
and James Potter are  are  that theyre  dead.
Dumbledore bowed his head. Professor McGonagall gasped.
Lily and JamesI cant believe itI didnt want to believe itOh,
Albus
Dumbledore reached out and patted her on the shoulder. I knowI
know he said heavily.
Professor McGonagalls voice trembled as she went on. Thats not all.
Theyre saying he tried to kill the Potters son, Harry. But he couldnt. He
couldnt kill that little boy. No one knows why, or how, but theyre saying that
when he couldnt kill Harry Potter, Voldemorts power somehow broke  and
thats why hes gone.
Dumbledore nodded glumly.
Its  its true? faltered Professor McGonagall. After all hes done
all the people hes killedhe couldnt kill a little boy? Its just astoundingof
all the things to stop himbut how in the name of heaven did Harry survive?
We can only guess. said Dumbledore. We may never know.
Professor McGonagall pulled out a lace handkerchief and dabbed at her
eyes beneath her spectacles. Dumbledore gave a great sniff as he took a golden
watch from his pocket and examined it. It was a very odd watch. It had twelve
hands but no numbers; instead, little planets were moving around the edge. It
must have made sense to Dumbledore, though, because he put it back in his
pocket and said, Hagrids late. I suppose it was he who told you Id be here, by
the way?
Yes, said Professor McGonagall. And I dont suppose youre going to
tell me why youre here, of all places?
Ive come to bring Harry to his aunt and uncle. Theyre the only family
he has left now.
You dont mean  you cant mean the people who live here? cried
Professor McGonagall, jumping to her feet and pointing at number four.
Dumbledore  you cant. Ive been watching them all day. You couldnt find
two people who are less like us. And theyve got this son  I saw him kicking
his mother all the way up the street, screaming for sweets. Harry Potter come
and live here!
Its the best place for him, said Dumbledore firmly. His aunt and
uncle will be able to explain everything to him when hes older. Ive written
them a letter.
A letter? repeated Professor McGonagall faintly, sitting back down on
the wall. Really, Dumbledore, you think you can explain all this in a letter?
These people will never understand him! Hell be famous  a legend  I
wouldnt be surprised if today was known as Harry Potter day in the future 
there will be books written about Harry  every child in our world will know
his name!
Exactly. said Dumbledore, looking very seriously over the top of his
half-moon glasses. It would be enough to turn any boys head. Famous before
he can walk and talk! Famous for something he wont even remember! Can you
see how much better off hell be, growing up away from all that until hes ready
to take it?
Professor McGonagall opened her mouth, changed her mind, swallowed,
and then said, Yes  yes, youre right, of course. But how is the boy getting
here, Dumbledore? She eyed his cloak suddenly as though she thought he might
be hiding Harry underneath it.
Hagrids bringing him.
You think it  wise  to trust Hagrid with something as important as
this?
I would trust Hagrid with my life, said Dumbledore.
Im not saying his heart isnt in the right place, said Professor
McGonagall grudgingly, but you cant pretend hes not careless. He does tend
to  what was that?
A low rumbling sound had broken the silence around them. It grew
steadily louder as they looked up and down the street for some sign of a
headlight; it swelled to a roar as they both looked up at the sky  and a huge
motorcycle fell out of the air and landed on the road in front of them.
If the motorcycle was huge, it was nothing to the man sitting astride it.
He was almost twice as tall as a normal man and at least five times as wide. He
looked simply too big to be allowed, and so wild  long tangles of bushy black
hair and beard hid most of his face, he had hands the size of trash can lids, and
his feet in their leather boots were like baby dolphins. In his vast, muscular arms
he was holding a bundle of blankets.
Hagrid, said Dumbledore, sounding relieved. At last. And where did
you get that motorcycle?
Borrowed it, Professor Dumbledore, sir, said the giant, climbing
carefully off the motorcycle as he spoke. Young Sirius Black lent it to me. Ive
got him, sir.
No problems, were there?
No, sir  house was almost destroyed, but I got him out all right before
the Muggles started swarmin around. He fell asleep as we was flyin over
Bristol.
Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall bent forward over the bundle of
blankets. Inside, just visible, was a baby boy, fast asleep. Under a tuft of jetblack
hair over his forehead they could see a curiously shaped cut, like a bolt of
lightning.
Is that where ? whispered Professor McGonagall.
Yes, said Dumbledore. Hell have that scar forever.
Couldnt you do something about it, Dumbledore?
Even if I could, I wouldnt. Scars can come in handy. I have one myself
above my left knee that is a perfect map of the London Underground. Well 
give him here, Hagrid  wed better get this over with.
Dumbledore took Harry in his arms and turned toward the Dursleys
house.
Could I  could I say good-bye to him, sir? asked Hagrid. He bent his
great, shaggy head over Harry and gave him what must have been a very
scratchy, whiskery kiss. Then, suddenly, Hagrid let out a howl like a wounded
dog.
Shhh! hissed Professor McGonagall, Youll wake the Muggles!
S-s-sorry, sobbed Hagrid, taking out a large, spotted handkerchief and
burying his face in it. But I c-c-cant stand it Lily an James dead  an poor
little Harry off ter live with Muggles 
Yes, yes, its all very sad, but get a grip on yourself, Hagrid, or well be
found, Professor McGonagall whispered, patting Hagrid gingerly on the arm as
Dumbledore stepped over the low garden wall and walked to the front door. He
laid Harry gently on the doorstep, took a letter out of his cloak, tucked it inside
Harrys blankets, and then came back to the other two. For a full minute the
three of them stood and looked at the little bundle; Hagrids shoulders shook,
Professor McGonagall blinked furiously, and the twinkling light that usually
shone from Dumbledores eyes seemed to have gone out.
Well, said Dumbledore finally, thats that. Weve no business staying
here. We may as well go and join the celebrations.
Yeah, said Hagrid in a very muffled voice, Ill be takin Sirius his bike
back. Gnight, Professor McGonagall  Professor Dumbledore, sir.
Wiping his streaming eyes on his jacket sleeve, Hagrid swung himself
onto the motorcycle and kicked the engine into life; with a roar it rose into the
air and off into the night.
I shall see you soon, I expect, Professor McGonagall, said
Dumbledore, nodding to her. Professor McGonagall blew her nose in reply.
Dumbledore turned and walked back down the street. On the corner he
stopped and took out the silver Put-Outer. He clicked it once, and twelve balls of
light sped back to their street lamps so that Privet Drive glowed suddenly orange
and he could make out a tabby cat slinking around the corner at the other end of
the street. He could just see the bundle of blankets on the step of number four.
Good luck, Harry, he murmured. He turned on his heel and with a
swish of his cloak, he was gone.
A breeze ruffled the neat hedges of Privet Drive, which lay silent and tidy
under the inky sky, the very last place you would expect astonishing things to
happen. Harry Potter rolled over inside his blankets without waking up. One
small hand closed on the letter beside him and he slept on, not knowing he was
special, not knowing he was famous, not knowing he would be woken in a few
hours time by Mrs. Dursleys scream as she opened the front door to put out the
milk bottles, nor that he would spend the next few weeks being prodded and
pinched by his cousin Dudley....He couldnt know that at this very moment,
people meeting in secret all over the country were holding up their glasses and
saying in hushed voices: To Harry Potter  the boy who lived!
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER TWO
THE VANISHING GLASS
N early ten years had passed since the Dursleys had woken up to find their
nephew on the front step, but Privet Drive had hardly changed at all. The sun
rose on the same tidy front gardens and lit up the brass number four on the
Dursleys front door; it crept into their living room, which was almost exactly
the same as it had been on the night when Mr. Dursley had seen that fateful news
report about the owls. Only the photographs on the mantelpiece really showed
how much time had passed. Ten years ago, there had been lots of pictures of
what looked like a large pink beach ball wearing different-colored bonnets 
but Dudley Dursley was no longer a baby, and now the photographs showed a
large blond boy riding his first bicycle, on a carousel at the fair, playing a
computer game with his father, being hugged and kissed by his mother. The
room held no sign at all that another boy lived in the house, too.
Yet Harry Potter was still there, asleep at the moment, but not for long.
His Aunt Petunia was awake and it was her shrill voice that made the first noise
of the day.
Up! Get up! Now!
Harry woke with a start. His aunt rapped on the door again.
Up! she screeched. Harry heard her walking toward the kitchen and
then the sound of the frying pan being put on the stove. He rolled onto his back
and tried to remember the dream he had been having. It had been a good one.
There had been a flying motorcycle in it. He had a funny feeling hed had the
same dream before.
His aunt was back outside the door.
Are you up yet? she demanded.
Nearly, said Harry.
Well, get a move on, I want you to look after the bacon. And dont you
dare let it burn, I want everything perfect on Duddys birthday.
Harry groaned.
What did you say? his aunt snapped through the door.
Nothing, nothing
Dudleys birthday  how could he have forgotten? Harry got slowly out
of bed and started looking for socks. He found a pair under his bed and, after
pulling a spider off one of them, put them on. Harry was used to spiders, because
the cupboard under the stairs was full of them, and that was where he slept.
When he was dressed he went down the hall into the kitchen. The table
was almost hidden beneath all Dudleys birthday presents. It looked as though
Dudley had gotten the new computer he wanted, not to mention the second
television and the racing bike. Exactly why Dudley wanted a racing bike was a
mystery to Harry, as Dudley was very fat and hated exercise  unless of course
it involved punching somebody. Dudleys favorite punching bag was Harry, but
he couldnt often catch him. Harry didnt look it, but he was very fast.
Perhaps it had something to do with living in a dark cupboard, but Harry
had always been small and skinny for his age. He looked even smaller and
skinnier than he really was because all he had to wear were old clothes of
Dudleys, and Dudley was about four times bigger than he was. Harry had a thin
face, knobbly knees, black hair, and bright green eyes. He wore round glasses
held together with a lot of Scotch tape because of all the times Dudley had
punched him on the nose. The only thing Harry liked about his own appearance
was a very thin scar on his forehead that was shaped like a bolt of lightning. He
had had it as long as he could remember, and the first question he could ever
remember asking his Aunt Petunia was how he had gotten it.
In the car crash when your parents died, she had said. And dont ask
questions.
Dont ask questions  that was the first rule for a quiet life with the
Dursleys.
Uncle Vernon entered the kitchen as Harry was turning over the bacon.
Comb your hair! he barked, by way of a morning greeting.
About once a week, Uncle Vernon looked over the top of his newspaper
and shouted that Harry needed a haircut. Harry must have had more haircuts than
the rest of the boys in his class put together, but it made no difference, his hair
simply grew that way  all over the place.
Harry was frying eggs by the time Dudley arrived in the kitchen with his
mother. Dudley looked a lot like Uncle Vernon. He had a large pink face, not
much neck, small, watery blue eyes, and thick blond hair that lay smoothly on
his thick, fat head. Aunt Petunia often said that Dudley looked like a baby angel
 Harry often said that Dudley looked like a pig in a wig.
Harry put the plates of egg and bacon on the table, which was difficult as
there wasnt much room. Dudley, meanwhile, was counting his presents. His
face fell.
Thirty-six, he said, looking up at his mother and father. Thats two
less than last year.
Darling, you havent counted Auntie Marges present, see, its here
under this big one from Mummy and Daddy.
All right, thirty-seven then, said Dudley, going red in the face. Harry,
who could see a huge Dudley tantrum coming on, began wolfing down his bacon
as fast as possible in case Dudley turned the table over.
Aunt Petunia obviously scented danger, too, because she said quickly,
And well buy you another two presents while were out today. Hows that,
popkin? Two more presents. Is that all right
Dudley thought for a moment. It looked like hard work. Finally he said
slowly, So Ill have thirty...thirty...
Thirty-nine, sweetums, said Aunt Petunia.
Oh. Dudley sat down heavily and grabbed the nearest parcel. All right
then.
Uncle Vernon chuckled.
Little tyke wants his moneys worth, just like his father. Atta boy,
Dudley! He ruffled Dudleys hair.
At that moment the telephone rang and Aunt Petunia went to answer it
while Harry and Uncle Vernon watched Dudley unwrap the racing bike, a video
camera, a remote control airplane, sixteen new computer games, and a VCR. He
was ripping the paper off a gold wristwatch when Aunt Petunia came back from
the telephone looking both angry and worried.
Bad news, Vernon, she said. Mrs. Figgs broken her leg. She cant
take him. She jerked her head in Harrys direction.
Dudleys mouth fell open in horror, but Harrys heart gave a leap. Every
year on Dudleys birthday, his parents took him and a friend out for the day, to
adventure parks, hamburger restaurants, or the movies. Every year, Harry was
left behind with Mrs. Figg, a mad old lady who lived two streets away. Harry
hated it there. The whole house smelled of cabbage and Mrs. Figg made him
look at photographs of all the cats shed ever owned.
Now what? said Aunt Petunia, looking furiously at Harry as though
hed planned this. Harry knew he ought to feel sorry that Mrs. Figg had broken
her leg, but it wasnt easy when he reminded himself it would be a whole year
before he had to look at Tibbles, Snowy, Mr. Paws, and Tufty again.
We could phone Marge, Uncle Vernon suggested.
Dont be silly, Vernon, she hates the boy.
The Dursleys often spoke about Harry like this, as though he wasnt there
 or rather, as though he was something very nasty that couldnt understand
them, like a slug.
What about whats-her-name, your friend  Yvonne?
On vacation in Majorca, snapped Aunt Petunia.
You could just leave me here, Harry put in hopefully (hed be able to
watch what he wanted on television for a change and maybe even have a go on
Dudleys computer).
Aunt Petunia looked as though shed just swallowed a lemon.
And come back and find the house in ruins? she snarled.
I wont blow up the house, said Harry, but they werent listening.
I suppose we could take him to the zoo, said Aunt Petunia slowly, 
and leave him in the car.
That cars new, hes not sitting in it alone.
Dudley began to cry loudly. In fact, he wasnt really crying  it had
been years since hed really cried  but he knew that if he screwed up his face
and wailed, his mother would give him anything he wanted.
Dinky Duddydums, dont cry, Mummy wont let him spoil your special
day! she cried, flinging her arms around him.
Idontwanthimt-t-to come! Dudley yelled between huge,
pretend sobs. He always sp-spoils everything! He shot Harry a nasty grin
through the gap in his mothers arms.
Just then, the doorbell rang  Oh, good Lord, theyre here! said Aunt
Petunia frantically  and a moment later, Dudleys best friend, Piers Polkiss,
walked in with his mother. Piers was a scrawny boy with a face like a rat. He
was usually the one who held peoples arms behind their backs while Dudley hit
them. Dudley stopped pretending to cry at once.
Half an hour later, Harry, who couldnt believe his luck, was sitting in the
back of the Dursleys car with Piers and Dudley, on the way to the zoo for the
first time in his life. His aunt and uncle hadnt been able to think of anything else
to do with him, but before theyd left, Uncle Vernon had taken Harry aside.
Im warning you, he had said, putting his large purple face right up
close to Harrys, Im warning you now, boy  any funny business, anything at
all  and youll be in that cupboard from now until Christmas.
Im not going to do anything, said Harry, honestly
But Uncle Vernon didnt believe him. No one ever did.
The problem was, strange things often happened around Harry and it was
just no good telling the Dursleys he didnt make them happen.
Once, Aunt Petunia, tired of Harry coming back from the barbers looking
as though he hadnt been at all, had taken a pair of kitchen scissors and cut his
hair so short he was almost bald except for his bangs, which she left to hide that
horrible scar. Dudley had laughed himself silly at Harry, who spent a sleepless
night imagining school the next day, where he was already laughed at for his
baggy clothes and taped glasses. Next morning, however, he had gotten up to
find his hair exactly as it had been before Aunt Petunia had sheared it off He had
been given a week in his cupboard for this, even though he had tried to explain
that he couldnt explain how it had grown back so quickly.
Another time, Aunt Petunia had been trying to force him into a revolting
old sweater of Dudleys (brown with orange puff balls). The harder she tried to
pull it over his head, the smaller it seemed to become, until finally it might have
fitted a hand puppet, but certainly wouldnt fit Harry. Aunt Petunia had decided
it must have shrunk in the wash and, to his great relief, Harry wasnt punished.
On the other hand, hed gotten into terrible trouble for being found on the
roof of the school kitchens. Dudleys gang had been chasing him as usual when,
as much to Harrys surprise as anyone elses, there he was sitting on the
chimney. The Dursleys had received a very angry letter from Harrys
headmistress telling them Harry had been climbing school buildings. But all hed
tried to do (as he shouted at Uncle Vernon through the locked door of his
cupboard) was jump behind the big trash cans outside the kitchen doors. Harry
supposed that the wind must have caught him in mid-jump.
But today, nothing was going to go wrong. It was even worth being with
Dudley and Piers to be spending the day somewhere that wasnt school, his
cupboard, or Mrs. Figgs cabbage-smelling living room.
While he drove, Uncle Vernon complained to Aunt Petunia. He liked to
complain about things: people at work, Harry, the council, Harry, the bank, and
Harry were just a few of his favorite subjects. This morning, it was motorcycles.
roaring along like maniacs, the young hoodlums, he said, as a
motorcycle overtook them.
I had a dream about a motorcycle, said Harry, remembering suddenly.
It was flying.
Uncle Vernon nearly crashed into the car in front. He turned right around
in his seat and yelled at Harry, his face like a gigantic beet with a mustache:
MOTORCYCLES DONT FLY!
Dudley and Piers sniggered.
I know they dont, said Harry. It was only a dream.
But he wished he hadnt said anything. If there was one thing the
Dursleys hated even more than his asking questions, it was his talking about
anything acting in a way it shouldnt, no matter if it was in a dream or even a
cartoon  they seemed to think he might get dangerous ideas.
It was a very sunny Saturday and the zoo was crowded with families. The
Dursleys bought Dudley and Piers large chocolate ice creams at the entrance and
then, because the smiling lady in the van had asked Harry what he wanted before
they could hurry him away, they bought him a cheap lemon ice pop. It wasnt
bad, either, Harry thought, licking it as they watched a gorilla scratching its head
who looked remarkably like Dudley, except that it wasnt blond.
Harry had the best morning hed had in a long time. He was careful to
walk a little way apart from the Dursleys so that Dudley and Piers, who were
starting to get bored with the animals by lunchtime, wouldnt fall back on their
favorite hobby of hitting him. They ate in the zoo restaurant, and when Dudley
had a tantrum because his knickerbocker glory didnt have enough ice cream on
top, Uncle Vernon bought him another one and Harry was allowed to finish the
first.
Harry felt, afterward, that he should have known it was all too good to
last.
After lunch they went to the reptile house. It was cool and dark in there,
with lit windows all along the walls. Behind the glass, all sorts of lizards and
snakes were crawling and slithering over bits of wood and stone. Dudley and
Piers wanted to see huge, poisonous cobras and thick, man-crushing pythons.
Dudley quickly found the largest snake in the place. It could have wrapped its
body twice around Uncle Vernons car and crushed it into a trash can  but at
the moment it didnt look in the mood. In fact, it was fast asleep.
Dudley stood with his nose pressed against the glass, staring at the
glistening brown coils.
Make it move, he whined at his father. Uncle Vernon tapped on the
glass, but the snake didnt budge.
Do it again, Dudley ordered. Uncle Vernon rapped the glass smartly
with his knuckles, but the snake just snoozed on.
This is boring, Dudley moaned. He shuffled away.
Harry moved in front of the tank and looked intently at the snake. He
wouldnt have been surprised if it had died of boredom itself  no company
except stupid people drumming their fingers on the glass trying to disturb it all
day long. It was worse than having a cupboard as a bedroom, where the only
visitor was Aunt Petunia hammering on the door to wake you up; at least he got
to visit the rest of the house.
The snake suddenly opened its beady eyes. Slowly, very slowly, it raised
its head until its eyes were on a level with Harrys.
It winked.
Harry stared. Then he looked quickly around to see if anyone was
watching. They werent. He looked back at the snake and winked, too.
The snake jerked its head toward Uncle Vernon and Dudley, then raised
its eyes to the ceiling. It gave Harry a look that said quite plainly:
I get that all the time.
I know, Harry murmured through the glass, though he wasnt sure the
snake could hear him. It must be really annoying.
The snake nodded vigorously.
Where do you come from, anyway? Harry asked.
The snake jabbed its tail at a little sign next to the glass. Harry peered at
it.
Boa Constrictor, Brazil.
Was it nice there?
The boa constrictor jabbed its tail at the sign again and Harry read on:
This specimen was bred in the zoo. Oh, I see  so youve never been to
Brazil?
As the snake shook its head, a deafening shout behind Harry made both
of them jump. DUDLEY! MR. DURSLEY! COME AND LOOK AT THIS
SNAKE! YOU WONT BELIEVE WHAT ITS DOING!
Dudley came waddling toward them as fast as he could.
Out of the way, you, he said, punching Harry in the ribs. Caught by
surprise, Harry fell hard on the concrete floor. What came next happened so fast
no one saw how it happened  one second, Piers and Dudley were leaning right
up close to the glass, the next, they had leapt back with howls of horror.
Harry sat up and gasped; the glass front of the boa constrictors tank had
vanished. The great snake was uncoiling itself rapidly, slithering out onto the
floor. People throughout the reptile house screamed and started running for the
exits.
As the snake slid swiftly past him, Harry could have sworn a low, hissing
voice said, Brazil, here I come. Thanksss, amigo.
The keeper of the reptile house was in shock.
But the glass, he kept saying, where did the glass go?
The zoo director himself made Aunt Petunia a cup of strong, sweet tea
while he apologized over and over again. Piers and Dudley could only gibber. As
far as Harry had seen, the snake hadnt done anything except snap playfully at
their heels as it passed, but by the time they were all back in Uncle Vernons car,
Dudley was telling them how it had nearly bitten off his leg, while Piers was
swearing it had tried to squeeze him to death. But worst of all, for Harry at least,
was Piers calming down enough to say, Harry was talking to it, werent you,
Harry?
Uncle Vernon waited until Piers was safely out of the house before
starting on Harry. He was so angry he could hardly speak. He managed to say,
Go  cupboard  stay  no meals, before he collapsed into a chair, and
Aunt Petunia had to run and get him a large brandy.
Harry lay in his dark cupboard much later, wishing he had a watch. He didnt
know what time it was and he couldnt be sure the Dursleys were asleep yet.
Until they were, he couldnt risk sneaking to the kitchen for some food.
Hed lived with the Dursleys almost ten years, ten miserable years, as
long as he could remember, ever since hed been a baby and his parents had died
in that car crash. He couldnt remember being in the car when his parents had
died. Sometimes, when he strained his memory during long hours in his
cupboard, he came up with a strange vision: a blinding flash of green light and a
burning pain on his forehead. This, he supposed, was the crash, though he
couldnt imagine where all the green light came from. He couldnt remember his
parents at all. His aunt and uncle never spoke about them, and of course he was
forbidden to ask questions. There were no photographs of them in the house.
When he had been younger, Harry had dreamed and dreamed of some
unknown relation coming to take him away, but it had never happened; the
Dursleys were his only family. Yet sometimes he thought (or maybe hoped) that
strangers in the street seemed to know him. Very strange strangers they were,
too. A tiny man in a violet top hat had bowed to him once while out shopping
with Aunt Petunia and Dudley. After asking Harry furiously if he knew the man,
Aunt Petunia had rushed them out of the shop without buying anything. A wildlooking
old woman dressed all in green had waved merrily at him once on a bus.
A bald man in a very long purple coat had actually shaken his hand in the street
the other day and then walked away without a word. The weirdest thing about all
these people was the way they seemed to vanish the second Harry tried to get a
closer look.
At school, Harry had no one. Everybody knew that Dudleys gang hated
that odd Harry Potter in his baggy old clothes and broken glasses, and nobody
liked to disagree with Dudleys gang.
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER THREE
LETTERS FROM NO ONE
T he escape of the Brazilian boa constrictor earned Harry his longest-ever
punishment. By the time he was allowed out of his cupboard again, the summer
holidays had started and Dudley had already broken his new video camera,
crashed his remote control airplane, and, first time out on his racing bike,
knocked down old Mrs. Figg as she crossed Privet Drive on her crutches.
Harry was glad school was over, but there was no escaping Dudleys
gang, who visited the house every single day. Piers, Dennis, Malcolm, and
Gordon were all big and stupid, but as Dudley was the biggest and stupidest of
the lot, he was the leader. The rest of them were all quite happy to join in
Dudleys favorite sport: Harry Hunting.
This was why Harry spent as much time as possible out of the house,
wandering around and thinking about the end of the holidays, where he could see
a tiny ray of hope. When September came he would be going off to secondary
school and, for the first time in his life, he wouldnt be with Dudley. Dudley had
been accepted at Uncle Vernons old private school, Smeltings. Piers Polkiss was
going there too. Harry, on the other hand, was going to Stonewall High, the local
public school. Dudley thought this was very funny.
They stuff peoples heads down the toilet the first day at Stonewall, he
told Harry. Want to come upstairs and practice?
No, thanks, said Harry. The poor toilets never had anything as
horrible as your head down it  it might be sick. Then he ran, before Dudley
could work out what hed said.
One day in July, Aunt Petunia took Dudley to London to buy his
Smeltings uniform, leaving Harry at Mrs. Figgs. Mrs. Figg wasnt as bad as
usual. It turned out shed broken her leg tripping over one of her cats, and she
didnt seem quite as fond of them as before. She let Harry watch television and
gave him a bit of chocolate cake that tasted as though shed had it for several
years.
That evening, Dudley paraded around the living room for the family in
his brand-new uniform. Smeltings boys wore maroon tailcoats, orange
knickerbockers, and flat straw hats called boaters. They also carried knobbly
sticks, used for hitting each other while the teachers werent looking. This was
supposed to be good training for later life.
As he looked at Dudley in his new knickerbockers, Uncle Vernon said
gruffly that it was the proudest moment of his life. Aunt Petunia burst into tears
and said she couldnt believe it was her Ickle Dudleykins, he looked so
handsome and grown-up. Harry didnt trust himself to speak. He thought two of
his ribs might already have cracked from trying not to laugh.
* * *
There was a horrible smell in the kitchen the next morning when Harry went
in for breakfast. It seemed to be coming from a large metal tub in the sink. He
went to have a look. The tub was full of what looked like dirty rags swimming in
gray water.
Whats this? he asked Aunt Petunia. Her lips tightened as they always
did if he dared to ask a question.
Your new school uniform, she said.
Harry looked in the bowl again.
Oh, he said, I didnt realize it had to be so wet.
Dont be stupid, snapped Aunt Petunia. Im dyeing some of Dudleys
old things gray for you. Itll look just like everyone elses when Ive finished.
Harry seriously doubted this, but thought it best not to argue. He sat
down at the table and tried not to think about how he was going to look on his
first day at Stonewall High  like he was wearing bits of old elephant skin,
probably.
Dudley and Uncle Vernon came in, both with wrinkled noses because of
the smell from Harrys new uniform. Uncle Vernon opened his newspaper as
usual and Dudley banged his Smelting stick, which he carried everywhere, on
the table.
They heard the click of the mail slot and flop of letters on the doormat.
Get the mail, Dudley, said Uncle Vernon from behind his paper.
Make Harry get it.
Get the mail, Harry.
Make Dudley get it.
Poke him with your Smelting stick, Dudley.
Harry dodged the Smelting stick and went to get the mail. Three things
lay on the doormat: a postcard from Uncle Vernons sister Marge, who was
vacationing on the Isle of Wight, a brown envelope that looked like a bill, and 
a letter for Harry.
Harry picked it up and stared at it, his heart twanging like a giant elastic
band. No one, ever, in his whole life, had written to him. Who would? He had no
friends, no other relatives  he didnt belong to the library, so hed never even
got rude notes asking for books back. Yet here it was, a letter, addressed so
plainly there could be no mistake:
Mr. H. Potter
The Cupboard under the Stairs
4 Privet Drive
Little Whinging
Surrey
The envelope was thick and heavy, made of yellowish parchment, and the
address was written in emerald-green ink. There was no stamp.
Turning the envelope over, his hand trembling, Harry saw a purple wax
seal bearing a coat of arms; a lion, an eagle, a badger, and a snake surrounding a
large letter H.
Hurry up, boy! shouted Uncle Vernon from the kitchen. What are you
doing, checking for letter bombs? He chuckled at his own joke.
Harry went back to the kitchen, still staring at his letter. He handed Uncle
Vernon the bill and the postcard, sat down, and slowly began to open the yellow
envelope.
Uncle Vernon ripped open the bill, snorted in disgust, and flipped over
the postcard.
Marges ill, he informed Aunt Petunia. Ate a funny whelk.
Dad! said Dudley suddenly. Dad, Harrys got something!
Harry was on the point of unfolding his letter, which was written on the
same heavy parchment as the envelope, when it was jerked sharply out of his
hand by Uncle Vernon.
Thats mine! said Harry, trying to snatch it back.
Whod be writing to you? sneered Uncle Vernon, shaking the letter
open with one hand and glancing at it. His face went from red to green faster
than a set of traffic lights. And it didnt stop there. Within seconds it was the
grayish white of old porridge.
P-P-Petunia! he gasped.
Dudley tried to grab the letter to read it, but Uncle Vernon held it high
out of his reach. Aunt Petunia took it curiously and read the first line. For a
moment it looked as though she might faint. She clutched her throat and made a
choking noise.
Vernon! Oh my goodness  Vernon!
They stared at each other, seeming to have forgotten that Harry and
Dudley were still in the room. Dudley wasnt used to being ignored. He gave his
father a sharp tap on the head with his Smelting stick.
I want to read that letter, he said loudly.
I want to read it, said Harry furiously, as its mine.
Get out, both of you, croaked Uncle Vernon, stuffing the letter back
inside its envelope.
Harry didnt move.
I WANT MY LETTER! he shouted.
Let me see it! demanded Dudley.
OUT! roared Uncle Vernon, and he took both Harry and Dudley by the
scruffs of their necks and threw them into the hall, slamming the kitchen door
behind them. Harry and Dudley promptly had a furious but silent fight over who
would listen at the keyhole; Dudley won, so Harry, his glasses dangling from
one ear, lay flat on his stomach to listen at the crack between door and floor.
Vernon, Aunt Petunia was saying in a quivering voice, look at the
address  how could they possibly know where he sleeps? You dont think
theyre watching the house?
Watching  spying  might be following us, muttered Uncle Vernon
wildly.
But what should we do, Vernon? Should we write back? Tell them we
dont want 
Harry could see Uncle Vernons shiny black shoes pacing up and down
the kitchen.
No, he said finally. No, well ignore it. If they dont get an answer
Yes, thats bestwe wont do anything
But 
Im not having one in the house, Petunia! Didnt we swear when we
took him in wed stamp out that dangerous nonsense?
That evening when he got back from work, Uncle Vernon did something
hed never done before; he visited Harry in his cupboard.
Wheres my letter? said Harry, the moment Uncle Vernon had squeezed
through the door. Whos writing to me?
No one. It was addressed to you by mistake, said Uncle Vernon shortly.
I have burned it.
It was not a mistake, said Harry angrily, it had my cupboard on it.
SILENCE! yelled Uncle Vernon, and a couple of spiders fell from the
ceiling. He took a few deep breaths and then forced his face into a smile, which
looked quite painful.
Er  yes, Harry  about this cupboard. Your aunt and I have been
thinkingyoure really getting a bit big for itwe think it might be nice if you
moved into Dudleys second bedroom.
Why? said Harry.
Dont ask questions! snapped his uncle. Take this stuff upstairs, now.
The Dursleys house had four bedrooms: one for Uncle Vernon and Aunt
Petunia, one for visitors (usually Uncle Vernons sister, Marge), one where
Dudley slept, and one where Dudley kept all the toys and things that wouldnt fit
into his first bedroom. It only took Harry one trip upstairs to move everything he
owned from the cupboard to this room. He sat down on the bed and stared
around him. Nearly everything in here was broken. The month-old video camera
was lying on top of a small, working tank Dudley had once driven over the next
door neighbors dog; in the corner was Dudleys first-ever television set, which
hed put his foot through when his favorite program had been canceled; there
was a large birdcage, which had once held a parrot that Dudley had swapped at
school for a real air rifle, which was up on a shelf with the end all bent because
Dudley had sat on it. Other shelves were full of books. They were the only
things in the room that looked as though theyd never been touched.
From downstairs came the sound of Dudley bawling at his mother, I
dont want him in thereI need that roommake him get out...
Harry sighed and stretched out on the bed. Yesterday hed have given
anything to be up here. Today hed rather be back in his cupboard with that letter
than up here without it.
Next morning at breakfast, everyone was rather quiet. Dudley was in shock.
Hed screamed, whacked his father with his Smelting stick, been sick on
purpose, kicked his mother, and thrown his tortoise through the greenhouse roof,
and he still didnt have his room back. Harry was thinking about this time
yesterday and bitterly wishing hed opened the letter in the hall. Uncle Vernon
and Aunt Petunia kept looking at each other darkly.
When the mail arrived, Uncle Vernon, who seemed to be trying to be nice
to Harry, made Dudley go and get it. They heard him banging things with his
Smelting stick all the way down the hall. Then he shouted, Theres another one!
Mr. H. Potter, The Smallest Bedroom, 4 Privet Drive 
With a strangled cry, Uncle Vernon leapt from his seat and ran down the
hall, Harry right behind him. Uncle Vernon had to wrestle Dudley to the ground
to get the letter from him, which was made difficult by the fact that Harry had
grabbed Uncle Vernon around the neck from behind. After a minute of confused
fighting, in which everyone got hit a lot by the Smelting stick, Uncle Vernon
straightened up, gasping for breath, with Harrys letter clutched in his hand.
Go to your cupboard  I mean, your bedroom, he wheezed at Harry.
Dudley  go  just go.
Harry walked round and round his new room. Someone knew he had
moved out of his cupboard and they seemed to know he hadnt received his first
letter. Surely that meant theyd try again? And this time hed make sure they
didnt fail. He had a plan.
The repaired alarm clock rang at six oclock the next morning. Harry turned
it off quickly and dressed silently. He mustnt wake the Dursleys. He stole
downstairs without turning on any of the lights.
He was going to wait for the postman on the corner of Privet Drive and
get the letters for number four first. His heart hammered as he crept across the
dark hall toward the front door 
AAAAARRRGH!
Harry leapt into the air; hed trodden on something big and squashy on
the doormat  something alive!
Lights clicked on upstairs and to his horror Harry realized that the big,
squashy something had been his uncles face. Uncle Vernon had been lying at the
foot of the front door in a sleeping bag, clearly making sure that Harry didnt do
exactly what hed been trying to do. He shouted at Harry for about half an hour
and then told him to go and make a cup of tea. Harry shuffled miserably off into
the kitchen and by the time he got back, the mail had arrived, right into Uncle
Vernons lap. Harry could see three letters addressed in green ink.
I want  he began, but Uncle Vernon was tearing the letters into
pieces before his eyes.
Uncle Vernon didnt go to work that day. He stayed at home and nailed
up the mail slot.
See, he explained to Aunt Petunia through a mouthful of nails, if they
cant deliver them theyll just give up.
Im not sure thatll work, Vernon.
Oh, these peoples minds work in strange ways, Petunia, theyre not like
you and me, said Uncle Vernon, trying to knock in a nail with the piece of
fruitcake Aunt Petunia had just brought him.
On Friday, no less than twelve letters arrived for Harry. As they couldnt go
through the mail slot they had been pushed under the door, slotted through the
sides, and a few even forced through the small window in the downstairs
bathroom.
Uncle Vernon stayed at home again. After burning all the letters, he got
out a hammer and nails and boarded up the cracks around the front and back
doors so no one could go out. He hummed Tiptoe Through the Tulips as he
worked, and jumped at small noises.
On Saturday, things began to get out of hand. Twenty-four letters to Harry
found their way into the house, rolled up and hidden inside each of the two
dozen eggs that their very confused milkman had handed Aunt Petunia through
the living room window. While Uncle Vernon made furious telephone calls to the
post office and the dairy trying to find someone to complain to, Aunt Petunia
shredded the letters in her food processor.
Who on earth wants to talk to you this badly? Dudley asked Harry in
amazement.
* * *
On Sunday morning, Uncle Vernon sat down at the breakfast table looking
tired and rather ill, but happy.
No post on Sundays, he reminded them cheerfully as he spread
marmalade on his newspapers, no damn letters today 
Something came whizzing down the kitchen chimney as he spoke and
caught him sharply on the back of the head. Next moment, thirty or forty letters
came pelting out of the fireplace like bullets. The Dursleys ducked, but Harry
leapt into the air trying to catch one 
Out! OUT!
Uncle Vernon seized Harry around the waist and threw him into the hall.
When Aunt Petunia and Dudley had run out with their arms over their faces,
Uncle Vernon slammed the door shut. They could hear the letters still streaming
into the room, bouncing off the walls and floor.
That does it, said Uncle Vernon, trying to speak calmly but pulling
great tufts out of his mustache at the same time. I want you all back here in five
minutes ready to leave. Were going away. Just pack some clothes. No
arguments!
He looked so dangerous with half his mustache missing that no one dared
argue. Ten minutes later they had wrenched their way through the boarded-up
doors and were in the car, speeding toward the highway. Dudley was sniffling in
the back seat; his father had hit him round the head for holding them up while he
tried to pack his television, VCR, and computer in his sports bag.
They drove. And they drove. Even Aunt Petunia didnt dare ask where
they were going. Every now and then Uncle Vernon would take a sharp turn and
drive in the opposite direction for a while.
Shake em offshake em off, he would mutter whenever he did this.
They didnt stop to eat or drink all day. By nightfall Dudley was howling.
Hed never had such a bad day in his life. He was hungry, hed missed five
television programs hed wanted to see, and hed never gone so long without
blowing up an alien on his computer.
Uncle Vernon stopped at last outside a gloomy-looking hotel on the
outskirts of a big city. Dudley and Harry shared a room with twin beds and
damp, musty sheets. Dudley snored but Harry stayed awake, sitting on the
windowsill, staring down at the lights of passing cars and wondering.
They ate stale cornflakes and cold tinned tomatoes on toast for breakfast the
next day. They had just finished when the owner of the hotel came over to their
table.
Scuse me, but is one of you Mr. H. Potter? Only I got about an undred
of these at the front desk.
She held up a letter so they could read the green ink address:
Mr. H. Potter
Room 17
Railview Hotel
Cokeworth
Harry made a grab for the letter but Uncle Vernon knocked his hand out of
the way. The woman stared.
Ill take them, said Uncle Vernon, standing up quickly and following
her from the dining room.
* * *
Wouldnt it be better just to go home, dear? Aunt Petunia suggested
timidly, hours later, but Uncle Vernon didnt seem to hear her. Exactly what he
was looking for, none of them knew. He drove them into the middle of a forest,
got out, looked around, shook his head, got back in the car, and off they went
again. The same thing happened in the middle of a plowed field, halfway across
a suspension bridge, and at the top of a multilevel parking garage.
Daddys gone mad, hasnt he? Dudley asked Aunt Petunia dully late
that afternoon. Uncle Vernon had parked at the coast, locked them all inside the
car, and disappeared.
It started to rain. Great drops beat on the roof of the car. Dudley sniveled.
Its Monday, he told his mother. The Great Humbertos on tonight. I
want to stay somewhere with a television.
Monday. This reminded Harry of something. If it was Monday  and
you could usually count on Dudley to know the days the week, because of
television  then tomorrow, Tuesday, was Harrys eleventh birthday. Of course,
his birthdays were never exactly fun  last year, the Dursleys had given him a
coat hanger and a pair of Uncle Vernons old socks. Still, you werent eleven
every day.
Uncle Vernon was back and he was smiling. He was also carrying a long,
thin package and didnt answer Aunt Petunia when she asked what hed bought.
Found the perfect place! he said. Come on! Everyone out!
It was very cold outside the car. Uncle Vernon was pointing at what
looked like a large rock way out at sea. Perched on top of the rock was the most
miserable little shack you could imagine. One thing was certain, there was no
television in there.
Storm forecast for tonight! said Uncle Vernon gleefully, clapping his
hands together. And this gentlemans kindly agreed to lend us his boat!
A toothless old man came ambling up to them, pointing, with a rather
wicked grin, at an old rowboat bobbing in the iron-gray water below them.
Ive already got us some rations, said Uncle Vernon, so all aboard!
It was freezing in the boat. Icy sea spray and rain crept down their necks
and a chilly wind whipped their faces. After what seemed like hours they
reached the rock, where Uncle Vernon, slipping and sliding, led the way to the
broken-down house.
The inside was horrible; it smelled strongly of seaweed, the wind
whistled through the gaps in the wooden walls, and the fireplace was damp and
empty. There were only two rooms.
Uncle Vernons rations turned out to be a bag of chips each and four
bananas. He tried to start a fire but the empty chip bags just smoked and
shriveled up.
Could do with some of those letters now, eh? he said cheerfully.
He was in a very good mood. Obviously he thought nobody stood a
chance of reaching them here in a storm to deliver mail. Harry privately agreed,
though the thought didnt cheer him up at all.
As night fell, the promised storm blew up around them. Spray from the
high waves splattered the walls of the hut and a fierce wind rattled the filthy
windows. Aunt Petunia found a few moldy blankets in the second room and
made up a bed for Dudley on the moth-eaten sofa. She and Uncle Vernon went
off to the lumpy bed next door, and Harry was left to find the softest bit of floor
he could and to curl up under the thinnest, most ragged blanket.
The storm raged more and more ferociously as the night went on. Harry
couldnt sleep. He shivered and turned over, trying to get comfortable, his
stomach rumbling with hunger. Dudleys snores were drowned by the low rolls
of thunder that started near midnight. The lighted dial of Dudleys watch, which
was dangling over the edge of the sofa on his fat wrist, told Harry hed be eleven
in ten minutes time. He lay and watched his birthday tick nearer, wondering if
the Dursleys would remember at all, wondering where the letter writer was now.
Five minutes to go. Harry heard something creak outside. He hoped the
roof wasnt going to fall in, although he might be warmer if it did. Four minutes
to go. Maybe the house in Privet Drive would be so full of letters when they got
back that hed be able to steal one somehow.
Three minutes to go. Was that the sea, slapping hard on the rock like
that? And (two minutes to go) what was that funny crunching noise? Was the
rock crumbling into the sea?
One minute to go and hed be eleven. Thirty seconds...twentyten
nine  maybe hed wake Dudley up, just to annoy him  threetwoone
BOOM.
The whole shack shivered and Harry sat bolt upright, staring at the door.
Someone was outside, knocking to come in.
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER FOUR
THE KEEPER OF THE KEYS
B OOM. They knocked again. Dudley jerked awake.
Wheres the cannon? he said stupidly.
There was a crash behind them and Uncle Vernon came skidding into the
room. He was holding a rifle in his hands  now they knew what had been in the
long, thin package he had brought with them.
Whos there? he shouted. I warn you  Im armed!
There was a pause. Then 
SMASH!
The door was hit with such force that it swung clean off its hinges and
with a deafening crash landed flat on the floor.
A giant of a man was standing in the doorway. His face was almost
completely hidden by a long, shaggy mane of hair and a wild, tangled beard, but
you could make out his eyes, glinting like black beetles under all the hair.
The giant squeezed his way into the hut, stooping so that his head just
brushed the ceiling. He bent down, picked up the door, and fitted it easily back
into its frame. The noise of the storm outside dropped a little. He turned to look
at them all.
Couldnt make us a cup o tea, could yeh? Its not been an easy journey.

He strode over to the sofa where Dudley sat frozen with fear.
Budge up, yeh great lump, said the stranger.
Dudley squeaked and ran to hide behind his mother, who was crouching,
terrified, behind Uncle Vernon.
An heres Harry! said the giant.
Harry looked up into the fierce, wild, shadowy face and saw that the
beetle eyes were crinkled in a smile.
Las time I saw you, you was only a baby, said the giant. Yeh look a
lot like yer dad, but yehve got yer moms eyes.
Uncle Vernon made a funny rasping noise.
I demand that you leave at once, sir! he said. You are breaking and
entering!
Ah, shut up, Dursley, yeh great prune, said the giant; he reached over
the back of the sofa, jerked the gun out of Uncle Vernons hands, bent it into a
knot as easily as if it had been made of rubber, and threw it into a corner of the
room.
Uncle Vernon made another funny noise, like a mouse being trodden on.
Anyway  Harry, said the giant, turning his back on the Dursleys, a
very happy birthday to yeh. Got summat fer yeh here  I mighta sat on it at
some point, but itll taste all right.
From an inside pocket of his black overcoat he pulled a slightly squashed
box. Harry opened it with trembling fingers. Inside was a large, sticky chocolate
cake with Happy Birthday Harry written on it in green icing.
Harry looked up at the giant. He meant to say thank you, but the words
got lost on the way to his mouth, and what he said instead was, Who are you?
The giant chuckled.
True, I havent introduced meself. Rubeus Hagrid, Keeper of Keys and
Grounds at Hogwarts.
He held out an enormous hand and shook Harrys whole arm.
What about that tea then, eh? he said, rubbing his hands together. Id
not say no ter summat stronger if yehve got it, mind.
His eyes fell on the empty grate with the shriveled chip bags in it and he
snorted. He bent down over the fireplace; they couldnt see what he was doing
but when he drew back a second later, there was a roaring fire there. It filled the
whole damp hut with flickering light and Harry felt the warmth wash over him
as though hed sunk into a hot bath.
The giant sat back down on the sofa, which sagged under his weight, and
began taking all sorts of things out of the pockets of his coat: a copper kettle, a
squashy package of sausages, a poker, a teapot, several chipped mugs, and a
bottle of some amber liquid that he took a swig from before starting to make tea.
Soon the hut was full of the sound and smell of sizzling sausage. Nobody said a
thing while the giant was working, but as he slid the first six fat, juicy, slightly
burnt sausages from the poker, Dudley fidgeted a little. Uncle Vernon said
sharply, Dont touch anything he gives you, Dudley.
The giant chuckled darkly.
Yer great puddin of a son don need fattenin anymore, Dursley, don
worry.
He passed the sausages to Harry, who was so hungry he had never tasted
anything so wonderful, but he still couldnt take his eyes off the giant. Finally, as
nobody seemed about to explain anything, he said, Im sorry, but I still dont
really know who you are.
The giant took a gulp of tea and wiped his mouth with the back of his
hand.
Call me Hagrid, he said, everyone does. An like I told yeh, Im
Keeper of Keys at Hogwarts  yehll know all about Hogwarts, o course.
Er  no, said Harry.
Hagrid looked shocked.
Sorry, Harry said quickly.
Sorry? barked Hagrid, turning to stare at the Dursleys, who shrank
back into the shadows. Its them as should be sorry! I knew yeh werent gettin
yer letters but I never thought yeh wouldnt even know abou Hogwarts, fer
cryin out loud! Did yeh never wonder where yer parents learned it all?
All what? asked Harry.
ALL WHAT? Hagrid thundered. Now wait jus one second!
He had leapt to his feet. In his anger he seemed to fill the whole hut. The
Dursleys were cowering against the wall.
Do you mean ter tell me, he growled at the Dursleys, that this boy 
this boy!  knows nothin abou  about ANYTHING?
Harry thought this was going a bit far. He had been to school, after all,
and his marks werent bad.
I know some things, he said. I can, you know, do math and stuff.
But Hagrid simply waved his hand and said, About our world, I mean.
Your world. My world. Yer parents world.
What world?
Hagrid looked as if he was about to explode.
DURSLEY! he boomed.
Uncle Vernon, who had gone very pale, whispered something that
sounded like Mimblewimble. Hagrid stared wildly at Harry.
But yeh must know about yer mom and dad, he said. I mean, theyre
famous. Youre famous.
What? My  my mom and dad werent famous, were they?
Yeh don know...yeh don know.... Hagrid ran his fingers through his
hair, fixing Harry with a bewildered stare.
Yeh don know what yeh are? he said finally.
Uncle Vernon suddenly found his voice.
Stop! he commanded. Stop right there, sir! I forbid you to tell the boy
anything!
A braver man than Vernon Dursley would have quailed under the furious
look Hagrid now gave him; when Hagrid spoke, his every syllable trembled with
rage.
You never told him? Never told him what was in the letter Dumbledore
left fer him? I was there! I saw Dumbledore leave it, Dursley! An youve kept it
from him all these years?
Kept what from me? said Harry eagerly.
STOP! I FORBID YOU! yelled Uncle Vernon in panic.
Aunt Petunia gave a gasp of horror.
Ah, go boil yer heads, both of yeh, said Hagrid. Harry  yer a
wizard.
There was silence inside the hut. Only the sea and the whistling wind
could be heard.
Im a what? gasped Harry.
A wizard, o course, said Hagrid, sitting back down on the sofa, which
groaned and sank even lower, an a thumpin good un, Id say, once yehve
been trained up a bit. With a mum an dad like yours, what else would yeh be?
An I reckon its abou time yeh read yer letter.
Harry stretched out his hand at last to take the yellowish envelope,
addressed in emerald green to Mr. H. Potter, The Floor, Hut-on-the-Rock, The
Sea. He pulled out the letter and read:
HOGWARTS SCHOOL of WITCHCRAFT and WIZARDRY
Headmaster: ALBUS DUMBLEDORE
(Order of Merlin, First Class, Grand Sorc., Chf. Warlock, Supreme
Mugwump, International Confed. of Wizards)
Dear Mr. Potter,
We are pleased to inform you that you have been accepted at Hogwarts
School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. Please find enclosed a list of all necessary
books and equipment.
Term begins on September 1. We await your owl by no later than July 31.
Yours sincerely,
Minerva McGonagall,
Deputy Headmistress
Questions exploded inside Harrys head like fireworks and he couldnt
decide which to ask first. After a few minutes he stammered, What does it
mean, they await my owl?
Gallopin Gorgons, that reminds me, said Hagrid, clapping a hand to
his forehead with enough force to knock over a cart horse, and from yet another
pocket inside his overcoat he pulled an owl  a real, live, rather ruffled-looking
owl  a long quill, and a roll of parchment. With his tongue between his teeth
he scribbled a note that Harry could read upside down:
Dear Professor Dumbledore,
Given Harry his letter.
Taking him to buy his things tomorrow.
Weathers horrible. Hope youre well.
Hagrid
Hagrid rolled up the note, gave it to the owl, which clamped it in its beak,
went to the door, and threw the owl out into the storm. Then he came back and
sat down as though this was as normal as talking on the telephone.
Harry realized his mouth was open and closed it quickly.
Where was I? said Hagrid, but at that moment, Uncle Vernon, still
ashen-faced but looking very angry, moved into the firelight.
Hes not going, he said.
Hagrid grunted.
Id like ter see a great Muggle like you stop him, he said.
A what? said Harry, interested.
A Muggle, said Hagrid, its what we call nonmagic folk like them.
An its your bad luck you grew up in a family o the biggest Muggles I ever laid
eyes on.
We swore when we took him in wed put a stop to that rubbish, said
Uncle Vernon, swore wed stamp it out of him! Wizard indeed!
You knew? said Harry. You knew Im a  a wizard?
Knew! shrieked Aunt Petunia suddenly. Knew! Of course we knew!
How could you not be, my dratted sister being what she was? Oh, she got a letter
just like that and disappeared off to that  that school  and came home every
vacation with her pockets full of frog spawn, turning teacups into rats. I was the
only one who saw her for what she was  a freak! But for my mother and
father, oh no, it was Lily this and Lily that, they were proud of having a witch in
the family!
She stopped to draw a deep breath and then went ranting on. It seemed
she had been wanting to say all this for years.
Then she met that Potter at school and they left and got married and had
you, and of course I knew youd be just the same, just as strange, just as  as 
abnormal  and then, if you please, she went and got herself blown up and we
got landed with you!
Harry had gone very white. As soon as he found his voice he said,
Blown up? You told me they died in a car crash!
CAR CRASH! roared Hagrid, jumping up so angrily that the Dursleys
scuttled back to their corner. How could a car crash kill Lily an James Potter?
Its an outrage! A scandal! Harry Potter not knowin his own story when every
kid in our world knows his name!
But why? What happened? Harry asked urgently.
The anger faded from Hagrids face. He looked suddenly anxious.
I never expected this, he said, in a low, worried voice. I had no idea,
when Dumbledore told me there might be trouble gettin hold of yeh, how much
yeh didnt know. Ah, Harry, I don know if Im the right person ter tell yeh 
but someones gotta  yeh cant go off ter Hogwarts not knowin.
He threw a dirty look at the Dursleys.
Well, its best yeh know as much as I can tell yeh  mind, I cant tell
yeh everythin, its a great mystry, parts of it.
He sat down, stared into the fire for a few seconds, and then said, It
begins, I suppose, with  with a person called  but its incredible yeh dont
know his name, everyone in our world knows 
Who?
Well  I don like sayin the name if I can help it. No one does.
Why not?
Gulpin gargoyles, Harry, people are still scared. Blimey, this is difficult.
See, there was this wizard who went ...bad. As bad as you could go. Worse.
Worse than worse. His name was...
Hagrid gulped, but no words came out.
Could you write it down? Harry suggested.
Nah  cant spell it. All right  Voldemort.  Hagrid shuddered. Don
make me say it again. Anyway, this  this wizard, about twenty years ago now,
started lookin fer followers. Got em, too  some were afraid, some just
wanted a bit o his power, cause he was gettin himself power, all right. Dark
days, Harry. Didnt know who ter trust, didnt dare get friendly with strange
wizards or witchesterrible things happened. He was takin over. Course, some
stood up to him  an he killed em. Horribly. One o the only safe places left
was Hogwarts. Reckon Dumbledores the only one You-Know-Who was afraid
of. Didnt dare try takin the school, not jus then, anyway.
Now, yer mum an dad were as good a witch an wizard as I ever knew.
Head boy an girl at Hogwarts in their day! Suppose the mystry is why You-
Know-Who never tried to get em on his side beforeprobably knew they were
too close ter Dumbledore ter want anythin ter do with the Dark Side.
Maybe he thought he could persuade em...maybe he just wanted em
outta the way. All anyone knows is, he turned up in the village where you was all
living, on Halloween ten years ago. You was just a year old. He came ter yer
house an  an 
Hagrid suddenly pulled out a very dirty, spotted handkerchief and blew
his nose with a sound like a foghorn.
Sorry, he said. But its that sad  knew yer mum an dad, an nicer
people yeh couldnt find  anyway.
You-Know-Who killed em. An then  an this is the real mystry of
the thing  he tried to kill you, too. Wanted ter make a clean job of it, I suppose,
or maybe he just liked killin by then. But he couldnt do it. Never wondered
how you got that mark on yer forehead? That was no ordinary cut. Thats what
yeh get when a powerful, evil curse touches yeh  took care of yer mum an dad
an yer house, even  but it didnt work on you, an thats why yer famous,
Harry. No one ever lived after he decided ter kill em, no one except you, an
hed killed some o the best witches an wizards of the age  the McKinnons,
the Bones, the Prewetts  an you was only a baby, an you lived.
Something very painful was going on in Harrys mind. As Hagrids story
came to a close, he saw again the blinding flash of green light, more clearly than
he had ever remembered it before  and he remembered something else, for the
first time in his life: a high, cold, cruel laugh.
Hagrid was watching him sadly.
Took yeh from the ruined house myself, on Dumbledores orders.
Brought yeh ter this lot.
Load of old tosh, said Uncle Vernon. Harry jumped; he had almost
forgotten that the Dursleys were there. Uncle Vernon certainly seemed to have
got back his courage. He was glaring at Hagrid and his fists were clenched.
Now, you listen here, boy, he snarled, I accept theres something
strange about you, probably nothing a good beating wouldnt have cured  and
as for all this about your parents, well, they were weirdoes, no denying it, and
the worlds better off without them in my opinion  asked for all they got,
getting mixed up with these wizarding types  just what I expected, always
knew theyd come to a sticky end 
But at that moment, Hagrid leapt from the sofa and drew a battered pink
umbrella from inside his coat. Pointing this at Uncle Vernon like a sword, he
said, Im warning you, Dursley  Im warning you  one more word.
In danger of being speared on the end of an umbrella by a bearded giant,
Uncle Vernons courage failed again; he flattened himself against the wall and
fell silent.
Thats better, said Hagrid, breathing heavily and sitting back down on
the sofa, which this time sagged right down to the floor.
Harry, meanwhile, still had questions to ask, hundreds of them.
But what happened to Vol-, sorry  I mean, You-Know-Who?
Good question, Harry. Disappeared. Vanished. Same night he tried ter
kill you. Makes yeh even more famous. Thats the biggest mystry, seehe was
gettin more an more powerful  whyd he go?
Some say he died. Codswallop, in my opinion. Dunno if he had enough
human left in him to die. Some say hes still out there, bidin his time, like, but I
don believe it. People who was on his side came back ter ours. Some of em
came outta kinda trances. Don reckon they couldve done if he was comin
back.
Most of us reckon hes still out there somewhere but lost his powers.
Too weak to carry on. Cause somethin about you finished him, Harry. There
was somethin goin on that night he hadnt counted on  I dunno what it was,
no one does  but somethin about you stumped him, all right.
Hagrid looked at Harry with warmth and respect blazing in his eyes, but
Harry, instead of feeling pleased and proud, felt quite sure there had been a
horrible mistake. A wizard? Him? How could he possibly be? Hed spent his life
being clouted by Dudley, and bullied by Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon; if he
was really a wizard, why hadnt they been turned into warty toads every time
theyd tried to lock him in his cupboard? If hed once defeated the greatest
sorcerer in the world, how come Dudley had always been able to kick him
around like a football?
Hagrid, he said quietly, I think you must have made a mistake. I dont
think I can be a wizard.
To his surprise, Hagrid chuckled.
Not a wizard, eh? Never made things happen when you was scared or
angry?
Harry looked into the fire. Now he came to think about itevery odd
thing that had ever made his aunt and uncle furious with him had happened when
he, Harry, had been upset or angrychased by Dudleys gang, he had somehow
found himself out of their reachdreading going to school with that ridiculous
haircut, hed managed to make it grow back...and the very last time Dudley had
hit him, hadnt he got his revenge, without even realizing he was doing it?
Hadnt he set a boa constrictor on him?
Harry looked back at Hagrid, smiling, and saw that Hagrid was positively
beaming at him.
See? said Hagrid. Harry Potter, not a wizard  you wait, youll be
right famous at Hogwarts.
But Uncle Vernon wasnt going to give in without a fight.
Havent I told you hes not going? he hissed. Hes going to Stonewall
High and hell be grateful for it. Ive read those letters and he needs all sorts of
rubbish  spell books and wands and 
If he wants ter go, a great Muggle like you wont stop him, growled
Hagrid. Stop Lily an James Potters son goin ter Hogwarts! Yer mad. His
names been down ever since he was born. Hes off ter the finest school of
witchcraft and wizardry in the world. Seven years there and he wont know
himself. Hell be with youngsters of his own sort, fer a change, an hell be under
the greatest headmaster Hogwarts ever had Albus Dumbled
I AM NOT PAYING FOR SOME CRACKPOT OLD FOOL TO
TEACH HIM MAGIC TRICKS! yelled Uncle Vernon.
But he had finally gone too far. Hagrid seized his umbrella and whirled it
over his head, NEVER  he thundered,  INSULT  ALBUS 
DUMBLEDORE  IN  FRONT  OF  ME!
He brought the umbrella swishing down through the air to point at
Dudley  there was a flash of violet light, a sound like a firecracker, a sharp
squeal, and the next second, Dudley was dancing on the spot with his hands
clasped over his fat bottom, howling in pain. When he turned his back on them,
Harry saw a curly pigs tail poking through a hole in his trousers.
Uncle Vernon roared. Pulling Aunt Petunia and Dudley into the other
room, he cast one last terrified look at Hagrid and slammed the door behind
them.
Hagrid looked down at his umbrella and stroked his beard.
Shouldnta lost me temper, he said ruefully, but it didnt work
anyway. Meant ter turn him into a pig, but I suppose he was so much like a pig
anyway there wasnt much left ter do.
He cast a sideways look at Harry under his bushy eyebrows.
Be grateful if yeh didnt mention that ter anyone at Hogwarts, he said.
Im  er  not supposed ter do magic, strictly speakin. I was allowed ter do a
bit ter follow yeh an get yer letters to yeh an stuff  one o the reasons I was so
keen ter take on the job.
Why arent you supposed to do magic? asked Harry.
Oh, well  I was at Hogwarts meself but I  er  got expelled, ter tell
yeh the truth. In me third year. They snapped me wand in half an everything.
But Dumbledore let me stay on as gamekeeper. Great man, Dumbledore.
Why were you expelled?
Its gettin late and weve got lots ter do tomorrow, said Hagrid loudly.
Gotta get up ter town, get all yer books an that.
He took off his thick black coat and threw it to Harry.
You can kip under that, he said. Don mind if it wriggles a bit, I think
I still got a couple o doormice in one o the pockets.
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER FIVE
DIAGON ALLEY
H arry woke early the next morning. Although he could tell it was daylight,
he kept his eyes shut tight.
It was a dream, he told himself firmly. I dreamed a giant called Hagrid
came to tell me I was going to a school for wizards. When I open my eyes Ill be
at home in my cupboard.
There was suddenly a loud tapping noise.
And theres Aunt Petunia knocking on the door, Harry thought, his heart
sinking. But he still didnt open his eyes. It had been such a good dream.
Tap. Tap. Tap.
All right, Harry mumbled, Im getting up.
He sat up and Hagrids heavy coat fell off him. The hut was full of
sunlight, the storm was over, Hagrid himself was asleep on the collapsed sofa,
and there was an owl rapping its claw on the window, a newspaper held in its
beak.
Harry scrambled to his feet, so happy he felt as though a large balloon
was swelling inside him. He went straight to the window and jerked it open. The
owl swooped in and dropped the newspaper on top of Hagrid, who didnt wake
up. The owl then fluttered onto the floor and began to attack Hagrids coat.
Dont do that.
Harry tried to wave the owl out of the way, but it snapped its beak
fiercely at him and carried on savaging the coat.
Hagrid! said Harry loudly. Theres an owl 
Pay him, Hagrid grunted into the sofa.
What?
He wants payin fer deliverin the paper. Look in the pockets.
Hagrids coat seemed to be made of nothing but pockets  bunches of
keys, slug pellets, balls of string, peppermint humbugs, teabags...finally, Harry
pulled out a handful of strange-looking coins.
Give him five Knuts, said Hagrid sleepily.
Knuts?
The little bronze ones.
Harry counted out five little bronze coins, and the owl held out his leg so
Harry could put the money into a small leather pouch tied to it. Then he flew off
through the open window.
Hagrid yawned loudly, sat up, and stretched.
Best be off, Harry, lots ter do today, gotta get up ter London an buy all
yer stuff fer school.
Harry was turning over the wizard coins and looking at them. He had just
thought of something that made him feel as though the happy balloon inside him
had got a puncture.
Um  Hagrid?
Mm? said Hagrid, who was pulling on his huge boots.
I havent got any money  and you heard Uncle Vernon last nighthe
wont pay for me to go and learn magic.
Dont worry about that, said Hagrid, standing up and scratching his
head. Dyeh think yer parents didnt leave yeh anything?
But if their house was destroyed 
They didn keep their gold in the house, boy! Nah, first stop fer us is
Gringotts. Wizards bank. Have a sausage, theyre not bad cold  an I wouldn
say no teh a bit o yer birthday cake, neither.
Wizards have banks?
Just the one. Gringotts. Run by goblins.
Harry dropped the bit of sausage he was holding.
Goblins?
Yeah  so yehd be mad ter try an rob it, Ill tell yeh that. Never mess
with goblins, Harry. Gringotts is the safest place in the world fer anything yeh
want ter keep safe  cept maybe Hogwarts. As a matter o fact, I gotta visit
Gringotts anyway. Fer Dumbledore. Hogwarts business. Hagrid drew himself
up proudly. He usually gets me ter do important stuff fer him. Fetchin you 
gettin things from Gringotts  knows he can trust me, see.
Got everythin? Come on, then.
Harry followed Hagrid out onto the rock. The sky was quite clear now
and the sea gleamed in the sunlight. The boat Uncle Vernon had hired was still
there, with a lot of water in the bottom after the storm.
How did you get here? Harry asked, looking around for another boat.
Flew, said Hagrid.
Flew?
Yeah  but well go back in this. Not spposed ter use magic now Ive
got yeh.
They settled down in the boat, Harry still staring at Hagrid, trying to
imagine him flying.
Seems a shame ter row, though, said Hagrid, giving Harry another of
his sideways looks. If I was ter  er  speed things up a bit, would yeh mind
not mentionin it at Hogwarts?
Of course not, said Harry, eager to see more magic. Hagrid pulled out
the pink umbrella again, tapped it twice on the side of the boat, and they sped off
toward land.
Why would you be mad to try and rob Gringotts? Harry asked.
Spells  enchantments, said Hagrid, unfolding his newspaper as he
spoke. They say theres dragons guardin the high security vaults. And then yeh
gotta find yer way  Gringotts is hundreds of miles under London, see. Deep
under the Underground. Yehd die of hunger tryin ter get out, even if yeh did
manage ter get yer hands on summat.
Harry sat and thought about this while Hagrid read his newspaper, the
Daily Prophet. Harry had learned from Uncle Vernon that people liked to be left
alone while they did this, but it was very difficult, hed never had so many
questions in his life.
Ministry o Magic messin things up as usual, Hagrid muttered, turning
the page.
Theres a Ministry of Magic? Harry asked, before he could stop
himself.
Course, said Hagrid. They wanted Dumbledore fer Minister, o
course, but hed never leave Hogwarts, so old Cornelius Fudge got the job.
Bungler if ever there was one. So he pelts Dumbledore with owls every morning,
askin fer advice.
But what does a Ministry of Magic do?
Well, their main job is to keep it from the Muggles that theres still
witches an wizards up an down the country.
Why?
Why? Blimey, Harry, everyoned be wantin magic solutions to their
problems. Nah, were best left alone.
At this moment the boat bumped gently into the harbor wall. Hagrid
folded up his newspaper, and they clambered up the stone steps onto the street.
Passersby stared a lot at Hagrid as they walked through the little town to
the station. Harry couldnt blame them. Not only was Hagrid twice as tall as
anyone else, he kept pointing at perfectly ordinary things like parking meters and
saying loudly, See that, Harry? Things these Muggles dream up, eh?
Hagrid, said Harry, panting a bit as he ran to keep up, did you say
there are dragons at Gringotts?
Well, so they say, said Hagrid. Crikey, Id like a dragon.
Youd like one?
Wanted one ever since I was a kid  here we go.
They had reached the station. There was a train to London in five
minutes time. Hagrid, who didnt understand Muggle money, as he called it,
gave the bills to Harry so he could buy their tickets.
People stared more than ever on the train. Hagrid took up two seats and
sat knitting what looked like a canary-yellow circus tent.
Still got yer letter, Harry? he asked as he counted stitches.
Harry took the parchment envelope out of his pocket.
Good, said Hagrid. Theres a list there of everything yeh need.
Harry unfolded a second piece of paper he hadnt noticed the night
before, and read:
HOGWARTS SCHOOL o f WITCHCRAFT and WIZARDRY
UNIFORM
First-year students will require:
1. Three sets of plain work robes (black)
2. One plain pointed hat (black) for day wear
3. One pair of protective gloves (dragon hide or similar)
4. One winter cloak (black, silver fastenings)
Please note that all pupils clothes should carry name tags
COURSE BOOKS
All students should have a copy of each of the following:
The Standard Book of Spells (Grade 1) by Miranda Goshawk
A History of Magic by Bathilda Bagshot
Magical Theory by Adalbert Waffling
A Beginners Guide to Transfiguration by Emeric Switch
One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi by Phyllida Spore
Magical Drafts and Potions by Arsenius Jigger
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them by Newt Scamander
The Dark Forces: A Guide to Self-Protection by Quentin Trimble
OTHER EQUIPMENT
1 wand
1 cauldron (pewter, standard size 2)
1 set of glass or crystal phials
1 telescope set
1 brass scales
Students may also bring an owl OR a cat OR a toad
PARENTS ARE REMINDED THAT FIRST YEARS ARE NOT
ALLOWED THEIR OWN BROOMSTICKS
Can we buy all this in London? Harry wondered aloud.
If yeh know where to go, said Hagrid.
Harry had never been to London before. Although Hagrid seemed to know
where he was going, he was obviously not used to getting there in an ordinary
way. He got stuck in the ticket barrier on the Underground, and complained
loudly that the seats were too small and the trains too slow.
I dont know how the Muggles manage without magic, he said as they
climbed a broken-down escalator that led up to a bustling road lined with shops.
Hagrid was so huge that he parted the crowd easily; all Harry had to do
was keep close behind him. They passed book shops and music stores,
hamburger restaurants and cinemas, but nowhere that looked as if it could sell
you a magic wand. This was just an ordinary street full of ordinary people.
Could there really be piles of wizard gold buried miles beneath them? Were there
really shops that sold spell books and broomsticks? Might this not all be some
huge joke that the Dursleys had cooked up? If Harry hadnt known that the
Dursleys had no sense of humor, he might have thought so; yet somehow, even
though everything Hagrid had told him so far was unbelievable, Harry couldnt
help trusting him.
This is it, said Hagrid, coming to a halt, the Leaky Cauldron. Its a
famous place.
It was a tiny, grubby-looking pub. If Hagrid hadnt pointed it out, Harry
wouldnt have noticed it was there. The people hurrying by didnt glance at it.
Their eyes slid from the big book shop on one side to the record shop on the
other as if they couldnt see the Leaky Cauldron at all. In fact, Harry had the
most peculiar feeling that only he and Hagrid could see it. Before he could
mention this, Hagrid had steered him inside.
For a famous place, it was very dark and shabby. A few old women were
sitting in a corner, drinking tiny glasses of sherry. One of them was smoking a
long pipe. A little man in a top hat was talking to the old bartender, who was
quite bald and looked like a toothless walnut. The low buzz of chatter stopped
when they walked in. Everyone seemed to know Hagrid; they waved and smiled
at him, and the bartender reached for a glass, saying, The usual, Hagrid?
Cant, Tom, Im on Hogwarts business, said Hagrid, clapping his great
hand on Harrys shoulder and making Harrys knees buckle.
Good Lord, said the bartender, peering at Harry, is this  can this be
?
The Leaky Cauldron had suddenly gone completely still and silent.
Bless my soul, whispered the old bartender, Harry Potterwhat an
honor.
He hurried out from behind the bar, rushed toward Harry and seized his
hand, tears in his eyes.
Welcome back, Mr. Potter, welcome back.
Harry didnt know what to say. Everyone was looking at him. The old
woman with the pipe was puffing on it without realizing it had gone out. Hagrid
was beaming.
Then there was a great scraping of chairs and the next moment, Harry
found himself shaking hands with everyone in the Leaky Cauldron.
Doris Crockford, Mr. Potter, cant believe Im meeting you at last.
So proud, Mr. Potter, Im just so proud.
Always wanted to shake your hand  Im all of a flutter.
Delighted, Mr. Potter, just cant tell you, Diggles the name, Dedalus
Diggle.
Ive seen you before! said Harry, as Dedalus Diggles top hat fell off in
his excitement. You bowed to me once in a shop.
He remembers! cried Dedalus Diggle, looking around at everyone.
Did you hear that? He remembers me! Harry shook hands again and again 
Doris Crockford kept coming back for more.
A pale young man made his way forward, very nervously. One of his
eyes was twitching.
Professor Quirrell! said Hagrid. Harry, Professor Quirrell will be one
of your teachers at Hogwarts.
P-P-Potter, stammered Professor Quirrell, grasping Harrys hand, ccant
t-tell you how p-pleased I am to meet you.
What sort of magic do you teach, Professor Quirrell?
D-Defense Against the D-D-Dark Arts, muttered Professor Quirrell, as
though hed rather not think about it. N-not that you n-need it, eh, P-P-Potter?
He laughed nervously. Youll be g-getting all your equipment, I suppose? Ive
g-got to p-pick up a new b-book on vampires, m-myself. He looked terrified at
the very thought.
But the others wouldnt let Professor Quirrell keep Harry to himself. It
took almost ten minutes to get away from them all. At last, Hagrid managed to
make himself heard over the babble.
Must get on  lots ter buy. Come on, Harry.
Doris Crockford shook Harrys hand one last time, and Hagrid led them
through the bar and out into a small, walled courtyard, where there was nothing
but a trash can and a few weeds.
Hagrid grinned at Harry.
Told yeh, didnt I? Told yeh you was famous. Even Professor Quirrell
was tremblin ter meet yeh  mind you, hes usually tremblin.
Is he always that nervous?
Oh, yeah. Poor bloke. Brilliant mind. He was fine while he was studyin
outta books but then he took a year off ter get some firsthand experience....They
say he met vampires in the Black Forest, and there was a nasty bit o trouble with
a hag  never been the same since. Scared of the students, scared of his own
subject  now, wheres me umbrella?
Vampires? Hags? Harrys head was swimming. Hagrid, meanwhile, was
counting bricks in the wall above the trash can.
Three uptwo across he muttered. Right, stand back, Harry.
He tapped the wall three times with the point of his umbrella.
The brick he had touched quivered  it wriggled  in the middle, a
small hole appeared  it grew wider and wider  a second later they were
facing an archway large enough even for Hagrid, an archway onto a cobbled
street that twisted and turned out of sight.
Welcome, said Hagrid, to Diagon Alley.
He grinned at Harrys amazement. They stepped through the archway.
Harry looked quickly over his shoulder and saw the archway shrink instantly
back into solid wall.
The sun shone brightly on a stack of cauldrons outside the nearest shop.
Cauldrons  All Sizes  Copper, Brass, Pewter, Silver  Self-Stirring 
Collapsible, said a sign hanging over them.
Yeah, youll be needin one, said Hagrid, but we gotta get yer money
first.
Harry wished he had about eight more eyes. He turned his head in every
direction as they walked up the street, trying to look at everything at once: the
shops, the things outside them, the people doing their shopping. A plump woman
outside an Apothecary was shaking her head as they passed, saying, Dragon
liver, seventeen Sickles an ounce, theyre mad.
A low, soft hooting came from a dark shop with a sign saying Eeylops
Owl Emporium  Tawny, Screech, Barn, Brown, and Snowy. Several boys of
about Harrys age had their noses pressed against a window with broomsticks in
it. Look, Harry heard one of them say, the new Nimbus Two Thousand 
fastest ever  There were shops selling robes, shops selling telescopes and
strange silver instruments Harry had never seen before, windows stacked with
barrels of bat spleens and eels eyes, tottering piles of spell books, quills, and
rolls of parchment, potion bottles, globes of the moon.
Gringotts, said Hagrid.
They had reached a snowy white building that towered over the other
little shops. Standing beside its burnished bronze doors, wearing a uniform of
scarlet and gold, was 
Yeah, thats a goblin, said Hagrid quietly as they walked up the white
stone steps toward him. The goblin was about a head shorter than Harry. He had
a swarthy, clever face, a pointed beard and, Harry noticed, very long fingers and
feet. He bowed as they walked inside. Now they were facing a second pair of
doors, silver this time, with words engraved upon them:
Enter, stranger, but take heed
Of what awaits the sin of greed,
For those who take, but do not earn,
Must pay most dearly in their turn.
So if you seek beneath our floors
A treasure that was never yours,
Thief, you have been warned, beware
Of finding more than treasure there.
Like I said, Yehd be mad ter try an rob it, said Hagrid.
A pair of goblins bowed them through the silver doors and they were in a
vast marble hall. About a hundred more goblins were sitting on high stools
behind a long counter, scribbling in large ledgers, weighing coins in brass scales,
examining precious stones through eyeglasses. There were too many doors to
count leading off the hall, and yet more goblins were showing people in and out
of these. Hagrid and Harry made for the counter.
Morning, said Hagrid to a free goblin. Weve come ter take some
money outta Mr. Harry Potters safe.
You have his key, sir?
Got it here somewhere, said Hagrid, and he started emptying his
pockets onto the counter, scattering a handful of moldy dog biscuits over the
goblins book of numbers. The goblin wrinkled his nose. Harry watched the
goblin on their right weighing a pile of rubies as big as glowing coals.
Got it, said Hagrid at last, holding up a tiny golden key.
The goblin looked at it closely.
That seems to be in order.
An Ive also got a letter here from Professor Dumbledore, said Hagrid
importantly, throwing out his chest. Its about the You-Know-What in vault
seven hundred and thirteen.
The goblin read the letter carefully.
Very well, he said, handing it back to Hagrid, I will have someone
take you down to both vaults. Griphook!
Griphook was yet another goblin. Once Hagrid had crammed all the dog
biscuits back inside his pockets, he and Harry followed Griphook toward one of
the doors leading off the hall.
Whats the You-Know-What in vault seven hundred and thirteen?
Harry asked.
Cant tell yeh that, said Hagrid mysteriously. Very secret. Hogwarts
business. Dumbledores trusted me. Moren my jobs worth ter tell yeh that.
Griphook held the door open for them. Harry, who had expected more
marble, was surprised. They were in a narrow stone passageway lit with flaming
torches. It sloped steeply downward and there were little railway tracks on the
floor. Griphook whistled and a small cart came hurtling up the tracks toward
them. They climbed in  Hagrid with some difficulty  and were off.
At first they just hurtled through a maze of twisting passages. Harry tried
to remember, left, right, right, left, middle fork, right, left, but it was impossible.
The rattling cart seemed to know its own way, because Griphook wasnt
steering.
Harrys eyes stung as the cold air rushed past them, but he kept them
wide open. Once, he thought he saw a burst of fire at the end of a passage and
twisted around to see if it was a dragon, but too late  they plunged even
deeper, passing an underground lake where huge stalactites and stalagmites grew
from the ceiling and floor.
I never know, Harry called to Hagrid over the noise of the cart, whats
the difference between a stalagmite and a stalactite?
Stalagmites got an m in it, said Hagrid. An don ask me questions
just now, I think Im gonna be sick.
He did look very green, and when the cart stopped at last beside a small
door in the passage wall, Hagrid got out and had to lean against the wall to stop
his knees from trembling.
Griphook unlocked the door. A lot of green smoke came billowing out,
and as it cleared, Harry gasped. Inside were mounds of gold coins. Columns of
silver. Heaps of little bronze Knuts.
All yours, smiled Hagrid.
All Harrys  it was incredible. The Dursleys couldnt have known
about this or theyd have had it from him faster than blinking. How often had
they complained how much Harry cost them to keep? And all the time there had
been a small fortune belonging to him, buried deep under London.
Hagrid helped Harry pile some of it into a bag.
The gold ones are Galleons, he explained. Seventeen silver Sickles to
a Galleon and twenty-nine Knuts to a Sickle, its easy enough. Right, that should
be enough fer a couple o terms, well keep the rest safe for yeh. He turned to
Griphook. Vault seven hundred and thirteen now, please, and can we go more
slowly?
One speed only, said Griphook.
They were going even deeper now and gathering speed. The air became
colder and colder as they hurtled round tight corners. They went rattling over an
underground ravine, and Harry leaned over the side to try to see what was down
at the dark bottom, but Hagrid groaned and pulled him back by the scruff of his
neck.
Vault seven hundred and thirteen had no keyhole.
Stand back, said Griphook importantly. He stroked the door gently
with one of his long fingers and it simply melted away.
If anyone but a Gringotts goblin tried that, theyd be sucked through the
door and trapped in there, said Griphook.
How often do you check to see if anyones inside? Harry asked.
About once every ten years, said Griphook with a rather nasty grin.
Something really extraordinary had to be inside this top security vault,
Harry was sure, and he leaned forward eagerly, expecting to see fabulous jewels
at the very least  but at first he thought it was empty. Then he noticed a grubby
little package wrapped up in brown paper lying on the floor. Hagrid picked it up
and tucked it deep inside his coat. Harry longed to know what it was, but knew
better than to ask.
Come on, back in this infernal cart, and dont talk to me on the way
back, its best if I keep me mouth shut, said Hagrid.
One wild cart ride later they stood blinking in the sunlight outside Gringotts.
Harry didnt know where to run first now that he had a bag full of money. He
didnt have to know how many Galleons there were to a pound to know that he
was holding more money than hed had in his whole life  more money than
even Dudley had ever had.
Might as well get yer uniform, said Hagrid, nodding toward Madam
Malkins Robes for All Occasions. Listen, Harry, would yeh mind if I slipped
off fer a pick-me-up in the Leaky Cauldron? I hate them Gringotts carts. He did
still look a bit sick, so Harry entered Madam Malkins shop alone, feeling
nervous.
Madam Malkin was a squat, smiling witch dressed all in mauve.
Hogwarts, dear? she said, when Harry started to speak. Got the lot
here  another young man being fitted up just now, in fact.
In the back of the shop, a boy with a pale, pointed face was standing on a
footstool while a second witch pinned up his long black robes. Madam Malkin
stood Harry on a stool next to him slipped a long robe over his head, and began
to pin it to the right length.
Hello, said the boy, Hogwarts, too?
Yes, said Harry.
My fathers next door buying my books and mothers up the street
looking at wands, said the boy. He had a bored, drawling voice. Then Im
going to drag them off to took at racing brooms. I dont see why first years cant
have their own. I think Ill bully father into getting me one and Ill smuggle it in
somehow.
Harry was strongly reminded of Dudley.
Have you got your own broom? the boy went on.
No, said Harry.
Play Quidditch at all?
No, Harry said again, wondering what on earth Quidditch could be.
I do  Father says its a crime if Im not picked to play for my house,
and I must say, I agree. Know what house youll be in yet?
No, said Harry, feeling more stupid by the minute.
Well, no one really knows until they get there, do they, but I know Ill
be in Slytherin, all our family have been  imagine being in Hufflepuff, I think
Id leave, wouldnt you?
Mmm, said Harry, wishing he could say something a bit more
interesting.
I say, look at that man! said the boy suddenly, nodding toward the front
window. Hagrid was standing there, grinning at Harry and pointing at two large
ice creams to show he couldnt come in.
Thats Hagrid, said Harry, pleased to know something the boy didnt.
He works at Hogwarts.
Oh, said the boy, Ive heard of him. Hes a sort of servant, isnt he?
Hes the gamekeeper, said Harry. He was liking the boy less and less
every second.
Yes, exactly. I heard hes a sort of savage  lives in a hut on the school
grounds and every now and then he gets drunk, tries to do magic, and ends up
setting fire to his bed.
I think hes brilliant, said Harry coldly.
Do you? said the boy, with a slight sneer. Why is he with you? Where
are your parents?
Theyre dead, said Harry shortly. He didnt feel much like going into
the matter with this boy.
Oh, sorry, said the other, not sounding sorry at all. But they were our
kind, werent they?
They were a witch and wizard, if thats what you mean.
I really dont think they should let the other sort in, do you? Theyre just
not the same, theyve never been brought up to know our ways. Some of them
have never even heard of Hogwarts until they get the letter, imagine. I think they
should keep it in the old wizarding families. Whats your surname, anyway?
But before Harry could answer, Madam Malkin said, Thats you done,
my dear, and Harry, not sorry for an excuse to stop talking to the boy, hopped
down from the footstool.
Well, Ill see you at Hogwarts, I suppose, said the drawling boy.
Harry was rather quiet as he ate the ice cream Hagrid had bought him
(chocolate and raspberry with chopped nuts).
Whats up? said Hagrid.
Nothing, Harry lied. They stopped to buy parchment and quills. Harry
cheered up a bit when he found a bottle of ink that changed color as you wrote.
When they had left the shop, he said, Hagrid, whats Quidditch?
Blimey, Harry, I keep forgettin how little yeh know  not knowin
about Quidditch!
Dont make me feel worse, said Harry. He told Hagrid about the pale
boy in Madam Malkins.
 and he said people from Muggle families shouldnt even be allowed
in 
Yer not from a Muggle family. If hed known who yeh were  hes
grown up knowin yer name if his parents are wizardin folk. You saw what
everyone in the Leaky Cauldron was like when they saw yeh. Anyway, what
does he know about it, some o the best I ever saw were the only ones with
magic in em in a long line o Muggles  look at yer mum! Look what she had
fer a sister!
So what is Quidditch?
Its our sport. Wizard sport. Its like  like soccer in the Muggle world
 everyone follows Quidditch  played up in the air on broomsticks and
theres four balls  sorta hard ter explain the rules.
And what are Slytherin and Hufflepuff?
School houses. Theres four. Everyone says Hufflepuff are a lot o
duffers, but 
I bet Im in Hufflepuff, said Harry gloomily.
Better Hufflepuff than Slytherin, said Hagrid darkly. Theres not a
single witch or wizard who went bad who wasnt in Slytherin. You-Know-Who
was one.
Vol-, sorry You-Know-Who was at Hogwarts?
Years an years ago, said Hagrid.
They bought Harrys school books in a shop called Flourish and Blotts
where the shelves were stacked to the ceiling with books as large as paving
stones bound in leather; books the size of postage stamps in covers of silk; books
full of peculiar symbols and a few books with nothing in them at all. Even
Dudley, who never read anything, would have been wild to get his hands on
some of these. Hagrid almost had to drag Harry away from Curses and
Countercurses (Bewitch Your Friends and Befuddle Your Enemies with the
Latest Revenges: Hair Loss, Jelly-Legs, Tongue-Tying and Much, Much More)
by Professor Vindictus Viridian.
I was trying to find out how to curse Dudley.
Im not sayin thats not a good idea, but yer not ter use magic in the
Muggle world except in very special circumstances, said Hagrid. An anyway,
yeh couldn work any of them curses yet, yehll need a lot more study before yeh
get ter that level.
Hagrid wouldnt let Harry buy a solid gold cauldron, either (It says
pewter on yer list), but they got a nice set of scales for weighing potion
ingredients and a collapsible brass telescope. Then they visited the Apothecary,
which was fascinating enough to make up for its horrible smell, a mixture of bad
eggs and rotted cabbages. Barrels of slimy stuff stood on the floor; jars of herbs,
dried roots, and bright powders lined the walls; bundles of feathers, strings of
fangs, and snarled claws hung from the ceiling. While Hagrid asked the man
behind the counter for a supply of some basic potion ingredients for Harry, Harry
himself examined silver unicorn horns at twenty-one Galleons each and
minuscule, glittery-black beetle eyes (five Knuts a scoop).
Outside the Apothecary, Hagrid checked Harrys list again.
Just yer wand left  A yeah, an I still havent got yeh a birthday
present.
Harry felt himself go red.
You dont have to 
I know I dont have to. Tell yeh what, Ill get yer animal. Not a toad,
toads went outta fashion years ago, yehd be laughed at  an I don like cats,
they make me sneeze. Ill get yer an owl. All the kids want owls, theyre dead
useful, carry yer mail an everythin.
Twenty minutes later, they left Eeylops Owl Emporium, which had been
dark and full of rustling and flickering, jewel-bright eyes. Harry now carried a
large cage that held a beautiful snowy owl, fast asleep with her head under her
wing. He couldnt stop stammering his thanks, sounding just like Professor
Quirrell.
Don mention it, said Hagrid gruffly. Don expect youve had a lotta
presents from them Dursleys. Just Ollivanders left now  only place fer wands,
Ollivanders, and yeh gotta have the best wand.
A magic wandthis was what Harry had been really looking forward to.
The last shop was narrow and shabby. Peeling gold letters over the door
read Ollivanders: Makers of Fine Wands since 382 B.C. A single wand lay on a
faded purple cushion in the dusty window.
A tinkling bell rang somewhere in the depths of the shop as they stepped
inside. It was a tiny place, empty except for a single, spindly chair that Hagrid
sat on to wait. Harry felt strangely as though he had entered a very strict library;
he swallowed a lot of new questions that had just occurred to him and looked
instead at the thousands of narrow boxes piled neatly right up to the ceiling. For
some reason, the back of his neck prickled. The very dust and silence in here
seemed to tingle with some secret magic.
Good afternoon, said a soft voice. Harry jumped. Hagrid must have
jumped, too, because there was a loud crunching noise and he got quickly off the
spindly chair.
An old man was standing before them, his wide, pale eyes shining like
moons through the gloom of the shop.
Hello, said Harry awkwardly.
Ah yes, said the man. Yes, yes. I thought Id be seeing you soon.
Harry Potter. It wasnt a question. You have your mothers eyes. It seems only
yesterday she was in here herself, buying her first wand. Ten and a quarter
inches long, swishy, made of willow. Nice wand for charm work.
Mr. Ollivander moved closer to Harry. Harry wished he would blink.
Those silvery eyes were a bit creepy.
Your father, on the other hand, favored a mahogany wand. Eleven
inches. Pliable. A little more power and excellent for transfiguration. Well, I say
your father favored it  its really the wand that chooses the wizard, of course.
Mr. Ollivander had come so close that he and Harry were almost nose to
nose. Harry could see himself reflected in those misty eyes.
And thats where
Mr. Ollivander touched the lightning scar on Harrys forehead with a
long, white finger.
Im sorry to say I sold the wand that did it, he said softly. Thirteenand-
a-half inches. Yew. Powerful wand, very powerful, and in the wrong
handswell, if Id known what that wand was going out into the world to do.

He shook his head and then, to Harrys relief, spotted Hagrid.
Rubeus! Rubeus Hagrid! How nice to see you again.Oak, sixteen
inches, rather bendy, wasnt it?
It was, sir, yes, said Hagrid.
Good wand, that one. But I suppose they snapped it in half when you
got expelled? said Mr. Ollivander, suddenly stern.
Er  yes, they did, yes, said Hagrid, shuffling his feet. Ive still got
the pieces, though, he added brightly.
But you dont use them? said Mr. Ollivander sharply.
Oh, no, sir, said Hagrid quickly. Harry noticed he gripped his pink
umbrella very tightly as he spoke.
Hmmm, said Mr. Ollivander, giving Hagrid a piercing look. Well,
now  Mr. Potter. Let me see. He pulled a long tape measure with silver
markings out of his pocket. Which is your wand arm?
Er  well, Im right-handed, said Harry.
Hold out your arm. Thats it. He measured Harry from shoulder to
finger, then wrist to elbow, shoulder to floor, knee to armpit and round his head.
As he measured, he said, Every Ollivander wand has a core of a powerful
magical substance, Mr. Potter. We use unicorn hairs, phoenix tail feathers, and
the heartstrings of dragons. No two Ollivander wands are the same, just as no
two unicorns, dragons, or phoenixes are quite the same. And of course, you will
never get such good results with another wizards wand.
Harry suddenly realized that the tape measure, which was measuring
between his nostrils, was doing this on its own. Mr. Ollivander was flitting
around the shelves, taking down boxes.
That will do, he said, and the tape measure crumpled into a heap on the
floor. Right then, Mr. Potter. Try this one. Beechwood and dragon heartstring.
Nine inches. Nice and flexible. just take it and give it a wave.
Harry took the wand and (feeling foolish) waved it around a bit, but Mr.
Ollivander snatched it out of his hand almost at once.
Maple and phoenix feather. Seven inches. Quite whippy. Try 
Harry tried  but he had hardly raised the wand when it, too, was
snatched back by Mr. Ollivander.
No, no  here, ebony and unicorn hair, eight and a half inches, springy.
Go on, go on, try it out.
Harry tried. And tried. He had no idea what Mr. Ollivander was waiting
for. The pile of tried wands was mounting higher and higher on the spindly chair,
but the more wands Mr. Ollivander pulled from the shelves, the happier he
seemed to become.
Tricky customer, eh? Not to worry, well find the perfect match here
somewhere  I wonder, now  yes, why not  unusual combination  holly
and phoenix feather, eleven inches, nice and supple.
Harry took the wand. He felt a sudden warmth in his fingers. He raised
the wand above his head, brought it swishing down through the dusty air and a
stream of red and gold sparks shot from the end like a firework, throwing
dancing spots of light on to the walls. Hagrid whooped and clapped and Mr.
Ollivander cried, Oh, bravo! Yes, indeed, oh, very good. Well, well, wellhow
curioushow very curious
He put Harrys wand back into its box and wrapped it in brown paper,
still muttering, Curiouscurious
Sorry, said Harry, but whats curious?
Mr. Ollivander fixed Harry with his pale stare.
I remember every wand Ive ever sold, Mr. Potter. Every single wand. It
so happens that the phoenix whose tail feather is in your wand, gave another
feather  just one other. It is very curious indeed that you should be destined for
this wand when its brother  why, its brother gave you that scar.
Harry swallowed.
Yes, thirteen-and-a-half inches. Yew. Curious indeed how these things
happen. The wand chooses the wizard, rememberI think we must expect great
things from you, Mr. Potter.After all, He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named did great
things  terrible, yes, but great.
Harry shivered. He wasnt sure he liked Mr. Ollivander too much. He
paid seven gold Galleons for his wand, and Mr. Ollivander bowed them from his
shop.
The late afternoon sun hung low in the sky as Harry and Hagrid made their
way back down Diagon Alley, back through the wall, back through the Leaky
Cauldron, now empty. Harry didnt speak at all as they walked down the road; he
didnt even notice how much people were gawking at them on the Underground,
laden as they were with all their funny-shaped packages, with the snowy owl
asleep in its cage on Harrys lap. Up another escalator, out into Paddington
station; Harry only realized where they were when Hagrid tapped him on the
shoulder.
Got time fer a bite to eat before yer train leaves, he said.
He bought Harry a hamburger and they sat down on plastic seats to eat
them. Harry kept looking around. Everything looked so strange, somehow.
You all right, Harry? Yer very quiet, said Hagrid.
Harry wasnt sure he could explain. Hed just had the best birthday of his
life  and yet  he chewed his hamburger, trying to find the words.
Everyone thinks Im special, he said at last. All those people in the
Leaky Cauldron, Professor Quirrell, Mr. Ollivanderbut I dont know anything
about magic at all. How can they expect great things? Im famous and I cant
even remember what Im famous for. I dont know what happened when Vol-,
sorry  I mean, the night my parents died.
Hagrid leaned across the table. Behind the wild beard and eyebrows he
wore a very kind smile.
Don you worry, Harry. Youll learn fast enough. Everyone starts at the
beginning at Hogwarts, youll be just fine. Just be yerself. I know its hard.
Yehve been singled out, an thats always hard. But yehll have a great time at
Hogwarts  I did  still do, smatter of fact.
Hagrid helped Harry on to the train that would take him back to the
Dursleys, then handed him an envelope.
Yer ticket fer Hogwarts,  he said. First o September  Kings Cross
 its all on yer ticket. Any problems with the Dursleys, send me a letter with
yer owl, shell know where to find me.See yeh soon, Harry.
The train pulled out of the station. Harry wanted to watch Hagrid until he
was out of sight; he rose in his seat and pressed his nose against the window, but
he blinked and Hagrid had gone.
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER SIX
THE JOURNEY FROM PLATFORM NINE AND THREE-QUARTERS
H arrys last month with the Dursleys wasnt fun. True, Dudley was now so
scared of Harry he wouldnt stay in the same room, while Aunt Petunia and
Uncle Vernon didnt shut Harry in his cupboard, force him to do anything, or
shout at him  in fact, they didnt speak to him at all. Half terrified, half
furious, they acted as though any chair with Harry in it were empty. Although
this was an improvement in many ways, it did become a bit depressing after a
while.
Harry kept to his room, with his new owl for company. He had decided to
call her Hedwig, a name he had found in A History of Magic. His school books
were very interesting. He lay on his bed reading late into the night, Hedwig
swooping in and out of the open window as she pleased. It was lucky that Aunt
Petunia didnt come in to vacuum anymore, because Hedwig kept bringing back
dead mice. Every night before he went to sleep, Harry ticked off another day on
the piece of paper he had pinned to the wall, counting down to September the
first.
On the last day of August he thought hed better speak to his aunt and
uncle about getting to Kings Cross station the next day, so he went down to the
living room where they were watching a quiz show on television. He cleared his
throat to let them know he was there, and Dudley screamed and ran from the
room.
Er  Uncle Vernon?
Uncle Vernon grunted to show he was listening.
Er  I need to be at Kings Cross tomorrow to  to go to Hogwarts.
Uncle Vernon grunted again.
Would it be all right if you gave me a lift?
Grunt. Harry supposed that meant yes.
Thank you.
He was about to go back upstairs when Uncle Vernon actually spoke.
Funny way to get to a wizards school, the train. Magic carpets all got
punctures, have they?
Harry didnt say anything.
Where is this school, anyway?
I dont know, said Harry, realizing this for the first time. He pulled the
ticket Hagrid had given him out of his pocket.
I just take the train from platform nine and three-quarters at eleven
oclock, he read.
His aunt and uncle stared.
Platform what?
Nine and three-quarters.
Dont talk rubbish, said Uncle Vernon. There is no platform nine and
three-quarters.
Its on my ticket.
Barking, said Uncle Vernon, howling mad, the lot of them. Youll see.
You just wait. All right, well take you to Kings Cross. Were going up to
London tomorrow anyway, or I wouldnt bother.
Why are you going to London? Harry asked, trying to keep things
friendly.
Taking Dudley to the hospital, growled Uncle Vernon. Got to have
that ruddy tail removed before he goes to Smeltings.
Harry woke at five oclock the next morning and was too excited and
nervous to go back to sleep. He got up and pulled on his jeans because he didnt
want to walk into the station in his wizards robes  hed change on the train.
He checked his Hogwarts list yet again to make sure he had everything he
needed, saw that Hedwig was shut safely in her cage, and then paced the room,
waiting for the Dursleys to get up. Two hours later, Harrys huge, heavy trunk
had been loaded into the Dursleys car, Aunt Petunia had talked Dudley into
sitting next to Harry, and they had set off.
They reached Kings Cross at half past ten. Uncle Vernon dumped
Harrys trunk onto a cart and wheeled it into the station for him. Harry thought
this was strangely kind until Uncle Vernon stopped dead, facing the platforms
with a nasty grin on his face.
Well, there you are, boy. Platform nine  platform ten. Your platform
should be somewhere in the middle, but they dont seem to have built it yet, do
they?
He was quite right, of course. There was a big plastic number nine over
one platform and a big plastic number ten over the one next to it, and in the
middle, nothing at all.
Have a good term, said Uncle Vernon with an even nastier smile. He
left without another word. Harry turned and saw the Dursleys drive away. All
three of them were laughing. Harrys mouth went rather dry. What on earth was
he going to do? He was starting to attract a lot of funny looks, because of
Hedwig. Hed have to ask someone.
He stopped a passing guard, but didnt dare mention platform nine and
three-quarters. The guard had never heard of Hogwarts and when Harry couldnt
even tell him what part of the country it was in, he started to get annoyed, as
though Harry was being stupid on purpose. Getting desperate, Harry asked for
the train that left at eleven oclock, but the guard said there wasnt one. In the
end the guard strode away, muttering about time wasters. Harry was now trying
hard not to panic. According to the large clock over the arrivals board, he had ten
minutes left to get on the train to Hogwarts and he had no idea how to do it; he
was stranded in the middle of a station with a trunk he could hardly lift, a pocket
full of wizard money, and a large owl.
Hagrid must have forgotten to tell him something you had to do, like
tapping the third brick on the left to get into Diagon Alley. He wondered if he
should get out his wand and start tapping the ticket inspectors stand between
platforms nine and ten.
At that moment a group of people passed just behind him and he caught a
few words of what they were saying.
 packed with Muggles, of course 
Harry swung round. The speaker was a plump woman who was talking to
four boys, all with flaming red hair. Each of them was pushing a trunk like
Harrys in front of him  and they had an owl.
Heart hammering, Harry pushed his cart after them. They stopped and so
did he, just near enough to hear what they were saying.
Now, whats the platform number? said the boys mother.
Nine and three-quarters! piped a small girl, also red-headed, who was
holding her hand, Mom, cant I go
Youre not old enough, Ginny, now be quiet. All right, Percy, you go
first.
What looked like the oldest boy marched toward platforms nine and ten.
Harry watched, careful not to blink in case he missed it  but just as the boy
reached the dividing barrier between the two platforms, a large crowd of tourists
came swarming in front of him and by the time the last backpack had cleared
away, the boy had vanished.
Fred, you next, the plump woman said.
Im not Fred, Im George, said the boy. Honestly, woman, you call
yourself our mother? Cant you tell Im George?
Sorry, George, dear.
Only joking, I am Fred, said the boy, and off he went. His twin called
after him to hurry up, and he must have done so, because a second later, he had
gone  but how had he done it?
Now the third brother was walking briskly toward the barrier he was
almost there  and then, quite suddenly, he wasnt anywhere.
There was nothing else for it.
Excuse me, Harry said to the plump woman.
Hello, dear, she said. First time at Hogwarts? Rons new, too.
She pointed at the last and youngest of her sons. He was tall, thin, and
gangling, with freckles, big hands and feet, and a long nose.
Yes, said Harry. The thing is  the thing is, I dont know how to 
How to get onto the platform? she said kindly, and Harry nodded.
Not to worry, she said. All you have to do is walk straight at the
barrier between platforms nine and ten. Dont stop and dont be scared youll
crash into it, thats very important. Best do it at a bit of a run if youre nervous.
Go on, go now before Ron.
Er  okay, said Harry.
He pushed his trolley around and stared at the barrier. It looked very
solid.
He started to walk toward it. People jostled him on their way to platforms
nine and ten. Harry walked more quickly. He was going to smash right into that
barrier and then hed be in trouble  leaning forward on his cart, he broke into a
heavy run  the barrier was coming nearer and nearer  he wouldnt be able to
stop  the cart was out of control  he was a foot away  he closed his eyes
ready for the crash 
It didnt comehe kept on runninghe opened his eyes. A scarlet steam
engine was waiting next to a platform packed with people. A sign overhead said
Hogwarts Express, eleven oclock. Harry looked behind him and saw a
wrought-iron archway where the barrier had been, with the words Platform Nine
and Three-Quarters on it, He had done it.
Smoke from the engine drifted over the heads of the chattering crowd,
while cats of every color wound here and there between their legs. Owls hooted
to one another in a disgruntled sort of way over the babble and the scraping of
heavy trunks.
The first few carriages were already packed with students, some hanging
out of the window to talk to their families, some fighting over seats. Harry
pushed his cart off down the platform in search of an empty seat. He passed a
round-faced boy who was saying, Gran, Ive lost my toad again.
Oh, Neville, he heard the old woman sigh.
A boy with dreadlocks was surrounded by a small crowd.
Give us a look, Lee, go on.
The boy lifted the lid of a box in his arms, and the people around him
shrieked and yelled as something inside poked out a long, hairy leg.
Harry pressed on through the crowd until he found an empty
compartment near the end of the train. He put Hedwig inside first and then
started to shove and heave his trunk toward the train door. He tried to lift it up
the steps but could hardly raise one end and twice he dropped it painfully on his
foot.
Want a hand? It was one of the red-haired twins hed followed through
the barrier.
Yes, please, Harry panted.
Oy, Fred! Cmere and help!
With the twins help, Harrys trunk was at last tucked away in a corner of
the compartment.
Thanks, said Harry, pushing his sweaty hair out of his eyes.
Whats that? said one of the twins suddenly, pointing at Harrys
lightning scar.
Blimey, said the other twin. Are you ?
He is, said the first twin. Arent you? he added to Harry.
What? said Harry.
Harry Potter. chorused the twins.
Oh, him, said Harry. I mean, yes, I am.
The two boys gawked at him, and Harry felt himself turning red. Then, to
his relief, a voice came floating in through the trains open door.
Fred? George? Are you there?
Coming, Mom.
With a last look at Harry, the twins hopped off the train.
Harry sat down next to the window where, half hidden, he could watch
the red-haired family on the platform and hear what they were saying. Their
mother had just taken out her handkerchief.
Ron, youve got something on your nose.
The youngest boy tried to jerk out of the way, but she grabbed him and
began rubbing the end of his nose.
Mom  geroff He wriggled free.
Aaah, has ickle Ronnie got somefink on his nosie? said one of the
twins.
Shut up, said Ron.
Wheres Percy? said their mother.
Hes coming now.
The oldest boy came striding into sight. He had already changed into his
billowing black Hogwarts robes, and Harry noticed a shiny silver badge on his
chest with the letter P on it.
Cant stay long, Mother, he said. Im up front, the prefects have got
two compartments to themselves 
Oh, are you a prefect, Percy? said one of the twins, with an air of great
surprise. You should have said something, we had no idea.
Hang on, I think I remember him saying something about it, said the
other twin. Once 
Or twice 
A minute 
All summer 
Oh, shut up, said Percy the Prefect.
How come Percy gets new robes, anyway? said one of the twins.
Because hes a prefect, said their mother fondly. All right, dear, well,
have a good term  send me an owl when you get there.
She kissed Percy on the cheek and he left. Then she turned to the twins.
Now, you two  this year, you behave yourselves. If I get one more
owl telling me youve  youve blown up a toilet or 
Blown up a toilet? Weve never blown up a toilet.
Great idea though, thanks, Mom.
Its not funny. And look after Ron.
Dont worry, ickle Ronniekins is safe with us.
Shut up, said Ron again. He was almost as tall as the twins already and
his nose was still pink where his mother had rubbed it.
Hey, Mom, guess what? Guess who we just met on the train?
Harry leaned back quickly so they couldnt see him looking.
You know that black-haired boy who was near us in the station? Know
who he is?
Who?
Harry Potter!
Harry heard the little girls voice.
Oh, Mom, can I go on the train and see him, Mom, eh please....
Youve already seen him, Ginny, and the poor boy isnt something you
goggle at in a zoo. Is he really, Fred? How do you know?
Asked him. Saw his scar. Its really there  like lightning.
Poor dear  no wonder he was alone, I wondered. He was ever so
polite when he asked how to get onto the platform.
Never mind that, do you think he remembers what You-Know-Who
looks like?
Their mother suddenly became very stern.
I forbid you to ask him, Fred. No, dont you dare. As though he needs
reminding of that on his first day at school.
All right, keep your hair on.
A whistle sounded.
Hurry up! their mother said, and the three boys clambered onto the
train. They leaned out of the window for her to kiss them good-bye, and their
younger sister began to cry.
Dont, Ginny, well send you loads of owls.
Well send you a Hogwarts toilet seat.
George!
Only joking, Mom.
The train began to move. Harry saw the boys mother waving and their
sister, half laughing, half crying, running to keep up with the train until it
gathered too much speed, then she fell back and waved.
Harry watched the girl and her mother disappear as the train rounded the
corner. Houses flashed past the window. Harry felt a great leap of excitement. He
didnt know what he was going to  but it had to be better than what he was
leaving behind.
The door of the compartment slid open and the youngest redheaded boy
came in.
Anyone sitting there? he asked, pointing at the seat opposite Harry.
Everywhere else is full.
Harry shook his head and the boy sat down. He glanced at Harry and
then looked quickly out of the window, pretending he hadnt looked. Harry saw
he still had a black mark on his nose.
Hey, Ron.
The twins were back.
Listen, were going down the middle of the train  Lee Jordans got a
giant tarantula down there.
Right, mumbled Ron.
Harry, said the other twin, did we introduce ourselves? Fred and
George Weasley. And this is Ron, our brother. See you later, then.
Bye, said Harry and Ron. The twins slid the compartment door shut
behind them.
Are you really Harry Potter? Ron blurted out.
Harry nodded.
Oh  well, I thought it might be one of Fred and Georges jokes, said
Ron. And have you really got  you know
He pointed at Harrys forehead.
Harry pulled back his bangs to show the lightning scar. Ron stared.
So thats where You-Know-Who ?
Yes, said Harry, but I cant remember it.
Nothing? said Ron eagerly.
Well  I remember a lot of green light, but nothing else.
Wow, said Ron. He sat and stared at Harry for a few moments, then, as
though he had suddenly realized what he was doing, he looked quickly out of the
window again.
Are all your family wizards? asked Harry, who found Ron just as
interesting as Ron found him.
Er  Yes, I think so, said Ron. I think Moms got a second cousin
whos an accountant, but we never talk about him.
So you must know loads of magic already.
The Weasleys were clearly one of those old wizarding families the pale
boy in Diagon Alley had talked about.
I heard you went to live with Muggles, said Ron. What are they like?
Horrible  well, not all of them. My aunt and uncle and cousin are,
though. Wish Id had three wizard brothers.
Five, said Ron. For some reason, he was looking gloomy. Im the
sixth in our family to go to Hogwarts. You could say Ive got a lot to live up to.
Bill and Charlie have already left  Bill was head boy and Charlie was captain
of Quidditch. Now Percys a prefect. Fred and George mess around a lot, but
they still get really good marks and everyone thinks theyre really funny.
Everyone expects me to do as well as the others, but if I do, its no big deal,
because they did it first. You never get anything new, either, with five brothers.
Ive got Bills old robes, Charlies old wand, and Percys old rat.
Ron reached inside his jacket and pulled out a fat gray rat, which was
asleep.
His names Scabbers and hes useless, he hardly ever wakes up. Percy
got an owl from my dad for being made a prefect, but they couldnt aff  I
mean, I got Scabbers instead.
Rons ears went pink. He seemed to think hed said too much, because he
went back to staring out of the window.
Harry didnt think there was anything wrong with not being able to
afford an owl. After all, hed never had any money in his life until a month ago,
and he told Ron so, all about having to wear Dudleys old clothes and never
getting proper birthday presents. This seemed to cheer Ron up.
and until Hagrid told me, I didnt know anything about being a
wizard or about my parents or Voldemort 
Ron gasped.
What? said Harry.
You said You-Know-Whos name! said Ron, sounding both shocked
and impressed. Id have thought you, of all people 
Im not trying to be brave or anything, saying the name, said Harry, I
just never knew you shouldnt. See what I mean? Ive got loads to learn.I bet,
he added, voicing for the first time something that had been worrying him a lot
lately, I bet Im the worst in the class.
You wont be. Theres loads of people who come from Muggle families
and they learn quick enough.
While they had been talking, the train had carried them out of London.
Now they were speeding past fields full of cows and sheep. They were quiet for
a time, watching the fields and lanes flick past.
Around half past twelve there was a great clattering outside in the
corridor and a smiling, dimpled woman slid back their door and said, Anything
off the cart, dears?
Harry, who hadnt had any breakfast, leapt to his feet, but Rons ears
went pink again and he muttered that hed brought sandwiches. Harry went out
into the corridor.
He had never had any money for candy with the Dursleys, and now that
he had pockets rattling with gold and silver he was ready to buy as many Mars
Bars as he could carry  but the woman didnt have Mars Bars. What she did
have were Bettie Botts Every Flavor Beans, Droobles Best Blowing Gum,
Chocolate Frogs. Pumpkin Pasties, Cauldron Cakes, Licorice Wands, and a
number of other strange things Harry had never seen in his life. Not wanting to
miss anything, he got some of everything and paid the woman eleven silver
Sickles and seven bronze Knuts.
Ron stared as Harry brought it all back in to the compartment and tipped
it onto an empty seat.
Hungry, are you?
Starving, said Harry, taking a large bite out of a pumpkin pasty.
Ron had taken out a lumpy package and unwrapped it. There were four
sandwiches inside. He pulled one of them apart and said, She always forgets I
dont like corned beef..
Swap you for one of these, said Harry, holding up a pasty. Go on 
You dont want this, its all dry, said Ron. She hasnt got much time,
he added quickly, you know, with five of us.
Go on, have a pasty, said Harry, who had never had anything to share
before or, indeed, anyone to share it with. It was a nice feeling, sitting there with
Ron, eating their way through all Harrys pasties, cakes, and candies (the
sandwiches lay forgotten).
What are these? Harry asked Ron, holding up a pack of Chocolate
Frogs. Theyre not really frogs, are they? He was starting to feel that nothing
would surprise him.
No, said Ron. But see what the card is. Im missing Agrippa.
What?
Oh, of course, you wouldnt know  Chocolate Frogs have cards,
inside them, you know, to collect  famous witches and wizards. Ive got about
five hundred, but I havent got Agrippa or Ptolemy.
Harry unwrapped his Chocolate Frog and picked up the card. It showed a
mans face. He wore half-moon glasses, had a long, crooked nose, and flowing
silver hair, beard, and mustache. Underneath the picture was the name Albus
Dumbledore.
So this is Dumbledore! said Harry.
Dont tell me youd never heard of Dumbledore! said Ron. Can I have
a frog? I might get Agrippa  thanks 
Harry turned over his card and read:
ALBUS DUMBLEDORE
CURRENTLY HEADMASTER OF HOGWARTS
C onsidered by many the greatest wizard of modern times, Dumbledore is
particularly famous for his defeat of the dark wizard Grindelwald in 1945, for
the discovery of the twelve uses of dragons blood, and his work on alchemy
with his partner, Nicolas Flamel. Professor Dumbledore enjoys chamber music
and tenpin bowling.
Harry turned the card back over and saw, to his astonishment, that
Dumbledores face had disappeared.
Hes gone!
Well, you cant expect him to hang around all day, said Ron. Hell be
back. No, Ive got Morgana again and Ive got about six of herdo you want it?
You can start collecting.
Rons eyes strayed to the pile of Chocolate Frogs waiting to be
unwrapped.
Help yourself, said Harry. But in, you know, the Muggle world,
people just stay put in photos.
Do they? What, they dont move at all? Ron sounded amazed.
Weird!
Harry stared as Dumbledore sidled back into the picture on his card and
gave him a small smile. Ron was more interested in eating the frogs than looking
at the Famous Witches and Wizards cards, but Harry couldnt keep his eyes off
them. Soon he had not only Dumbledore and Morgana, but Hengist of
Woodcroft, Alberic Grunnion, Circe, Paracelsus, and Merlin. He finally tore his
eyes away from the Druidess Cliodna, who was scratching her nose, to open a
bag of Bertie Botts Every Flavor Beans.
You want to be careful with those, Ron warned Harry. When they say
every flavor, they mean every flavor  you know, you get all the ordinary ones
like chocolate and peppermint and marmalade, but then you can get spinach and
liver and tripe. George reckons he had a booger-flavored one once.
Ron picked up a green bean, looked at it carefully, and bit into a corner.
Bleaaargh  see? Sprouts.
They had a good time eating the Every Flavor Beans. Harry got toast,
coconut, baked bean, strawberry, curry, grass, coffee, sardine, and was even
brave enough to nibble the end off a funny gray one Ron wouldnt touch, which
turned out to be pepper.
The countryside now flying past the window was becoming wilder. The
neat fields had gone. Now there were woods, twisting rivers, and dark green
hills.
There was a knock on the door of their compartment and the round-faced
boy Harry had passed on platform nine and three-quarters came in. He looked
tearful.
Sorry, he said, but have you seen a toad at all?
When they shook their heads, he wailed, Ive lost him! He keeps getting
away from me!
Hell turn up, said Harry.
Yes, said the boy miserably. Well, if you see him
He left.
Dont know why hes so bothered, said Ron. If Id brought a toad Id
lose it as quick as I could. Mind you, I brought Scabbers, so I cant talk.
The rat was still snoozing on Rons lap.
He might have died and you wouldnt know the difference, said Ron in
disgust. I tried to turn him yellow yesterday to make him more interesting, but
the spell didnt work. Ill show you, look
He rummaged around in his trunk and pulled out a very battered-looking
wand. It was chipped in places and something white was glinting at the end.
Unicorn hairs nearly poking out. Anyway 
He had just raised his wand when the compartment door slid open again.
The toadless boy was back, but this time he had a girl with him. She was already
wearing her new Hogwarts robes.
Has anyone seen a toad? Nevilles lost one, she said. She had a bossy
sort of voice, lots of bushy brown hair, and rather large front teeth.
Weve already told him we havent seen it, said Ron, but the girl
wasnt listening, she was looking at the wand in his hand.
Oh, are you doing magic? Lets see it, then.
She sat down. Ron looked taken aback.
Er  all right.
He cleared his throat.
Sunshine, daisies, butter mellow,
Turn this stupid, fat rat yellow.
He waved his wand, but nothing happened. Scabbers stayed gray and fast
asleep.
Are you sure thats a real spell? said the girl. Well, its not very good,
is it? Ive tried a few simple spells just for practice and its all worked for me.
Nobody in my familys magic at all, it was ever such a surprise when I got my
letter, but I was ever so pleased, of course, I mean, its the very best school of
witchcraft there is, Ive heard  Ive learned all our course books by heart, of
course, I just hope it will be enough  Im Hermione Granger, by the way, who
are you?
She said all this very fast.
Harry looked at Ron, and was relieved to see by his stunned face that he
hadnt learned all the course books by heart either.
Im Ron Weasley, Ron muttered.
Harry Potter, said Harry.
Are you really? said Hermione. I know all about you, of course  I
got a few extra books, for background reading, and youre in Modern Magical
History and The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts and Great Wizarding Events of
the Twentieth Century.
Am I? said Harry, feeling dazed.
Goodness, didnt you know, Id have found out everything I could if it
was me, said Hermione. Do either of you know what house youll be in? Ive
been asking around, and I hope Im in Gryffindor, it sounds by far the best; I
hear Dumbledore himself was in it, but I suppose Ravenclaw wouldnt be too
bad....Anyway, wed better go and look for Nevilles toad. You two had better
change, you know, I expect well be there soon.
And she left, taking the toadless boy with her.
Whatever house Im in, I hope shes not in it, said Ron. He threw his
wand back into his trunk. Stupid spell  George gave it to me, bet he knew it
was a dud.
What house are your brothers in? asked Harry.
Gryffindor, said Ron. Gloom seemed to be settling on him again.
Mom and Dad were in it, too. I dont know what theyll say if Im not. I dont
suppose Ravenclaw would be too bad, but imagine if they put me in Slytherin.
Thats the house Vol-, I mean, You-Know-Who was in?
Yeah, said Ron. He flopped back into his seat, looking depressed.
You know, I think the ends of Scabbers whiskers are a bit lighter, said
Harry, trying to take Rons mind off houses. So what do your oldest brothers do
now that theyve left, anyway?
Harry was wondering what a wizard did once hed finished school.
Charlies in Romania studying dragons, and Bills in Africa doing
something for Gringotts, said Ron. Did you hear about Gringotts? Its been all
over the Daily Prophet, but I dont suppose you get that with the Muggles 
someone tried to rob a high security vault.
Harry stared.
Really? What happened to them?
Nothing, thats why its such big news. They havent been caught. My
dad says it mustve been a powerful Dark wizard to get round Gringotts, but they
dont think they took anything, thats whats odd. Course, everyone gets scared
when something like this happens in case You-Know-Whos behind it.
Harry turned this news over in his mind. He was starting to get a prickle
of fear every time You-Know-Who was mentioned. He supposed this was all
part of entering the magical world, but it had been a lot more comfortable saying
Voldemort without worrying.
Whats your Quidditch team? Ron asked.
Er  I dont know any. Harry confessed.
What! Ron looked dumbfounded. Oh, you wait, its the best game in
the world  And he was off, explaining all about the four balls and the
positions of the seven players, describing famous games hed been to with his
brothers and the broomstick hed like to get if he had the money. He was just
taking Harry through the finer points of the game when the compartment door
slid open yet again, but it wasnt Neville the toadless boy, or Hermione Granger
this time.
Three boys entered, and Harry recognized the middle one at once: it was
the pale boy from Madam Malkins robe shop. He was looking at Harry with a
lot more interest than hed shown back in Diagon Alley.
Is it true? he said. Theyre saying all down the train that Harry
Potters in this compartment. So its you, is it?
Yes, said Harry. He was looking at the other boys. Both of them were
thickset and looked extremely mean. Standing on either side of the pale boy, they
looked like bodyguards.
Oh, this is Crabbe and this is Goyle, said the pale boy carelessly,
noticing where Harry was looking. And my names Malfoy, Draco Malfoy.
Ron gave a slight cough, which might have been hiding a snigger. Draco
Malfoy looked at him.
Think my names funny, do you? No need to ask who you are. My
father told me all the Weasleys have red hair, freckles, and more children than
they can afford.
He turned back to Harry. Youll soon find out some wizarding families
are much better than others, Potter. You dont want to go making friends with the
wrong sort. I can help you there.
He held out his hand to shake Harrys, but Harry didnt take it.
I think I can tell who the wrong sort are for myself, thanks, he said
coolly.
Draco Malfoy didnt go red, but a pink tinge appeared in his pale cheeks.
Id be careful if I were you, Potter, he said slowly. Unless youre a bit
politer youll go the same way as your parents. They didnt know what was good
for them, either. You hang around with riffraff like the Weasleys and that Hagrid,
and itll rub off on you.
Both Harry and Ron stood up.
Say that again, Ron said, his face as red as his hair.
Oh, youre going to fight us, are you? Malfoy sneered.
Unless you get out now, said Harry, more bravely than he felt, because
Crabbe and Goyle were a lot bigger than him or Ron.
But we dont feet like leaving, do we, boys? Weve eaten all our food
and you still seem to have some.
Goyle reached toward the Chocolate Frogs next to Ron  Ron leapt
forward, but before hed so much as touched Goyle, Goyle let out a horrible yell.
Scabbers the rat was hanging off his finger, sharp little teeth sunk deep
into Goyles knuckle  Crabbe and Malfoy backed away as Goyle swung
Scabbers round and round, howling, and when Scabbers finally flew off and hit
the window, all three of them disappeared at once. Perhaps they thought there
were more rats lurking among the sweets, or perhaps theyd heard footsteps,
because a second later, Hermione Granger had come in.
What has been going on? she said, looking at the sweets all over the
floor and Ron picking up Scabbers by his tail.
I think hes been knocked out, Ron said to Harry. He looked closer at
Scabbers. No  I dont believe it  hes gone back to sleep.
And so he had.
Youve met Malfoy before?
Harry explained about their meeting in Diagon Alley.
Ive heard of his family, said Ron darkly. They were some of the first
to come back to our side after You-Know-Who disappeared. Said theyd been
bewitched. My dad doesnt believe it. He says Malfoys father didnt need an
excuse to go over to the Dark Side. He turned to Hermione. Can we help you
with something?
Youd better hurry up and put your robes on, Ive just been up to the
front to ask the conductor, and he says were nearly there. You havent been
fighting, have you? Youll be in trouble before we even get there!
Scabbers has been fighting, not us, said Ron, scowling at her. Would
you mind leaving while we change?
All right  I only came in here because people outside are behaving
very childishly, racing up and down the corridors, said Hermione in a sniffy
voice. And youve got dirt on your nose, by the way, did you know?
Ron glared at her as she left. Harry peered out of the window. It was
getting dark. He could see mountains and forests under a deep purple sky. The
train did seem to be slowing down.
He and Ron took off their jackets and pulled on their long black robes.
Rons were a bit short for him, you could see his sneakers underneath them.
A voice echoed through the train: We will be reaching Hogwarts in five
minutes time. Please leave your luggage on the train, it will be taken to the
school separately.
Harrys stomach lurched with nerves and Ron, he saw, looked pale under
his freckles. They crammed their pockets with the last of the sweets and joined
the crowd thronging the corridor.
The train slowed right down and finally stopped. People pushed their
way toward the door and out on to a tiny, dark platform. Harry shivered in the
cold night air. Then a lamp came bobbing over the heads of the students, and
Harry heard a familiar voice: Firs years! Firs years over here! All right there,
Harry?
Hagrids big hairy face beamed over the sea of heads.
Cmon, follow me  any more firs years? Mind yer step, now! Firs
years follow me!
Slipping and stumbling, they followed Hagrid down what seemed to be a
steep, narrow path. It was so dark on either side of them that Harry thought there
must be thick trees there. Nobody spoke much. Neville, the boy who kept losing
his toad, sniffed once or twice.
Yehll get yer firs sight o Hogwarts in a sec, Hagrid called over his
shoulder, jus round this bend here.
There was a loud Oooooh!
The narrow path had opened suddenly onto the edge of a great black
lake. Perched atop a high mountain on the other side, its windows sparkling in
the starry sky, was a vast castle with many turrets and towers.
No moren four to a boat! Hagrid called, pointing to a fleet of little
boats sitting in the water by the shore. Harry and Ron were followed into their
boat by Neville and Hermione.
Everyone in? shouted Hagrid, who had a boat to himself. Right then
 FORWARD!
And the fleet of little boats moved off all at once, gliding across the lake,
which was as smooth as glass. Everyone was silent, staring up at the great castle
overhead. It towered over them as they sailed nearer and nearer to the cliff on
which it stood.
Heads down! yelled Hagrid as the first boats reached the cliff; they all
bent their heads and the little boats carried them through a curtain of ivy that hid
a wide opening in the cliff face. They were carried along a dark tunnel, which
seemed to be taking them right underneath the castle, until they reached a kind
of underground harbor, where they clambered out onto rocks and pebbles.
Oy, you there! Is this your toad? said Hagrid, who was checking the
boats as people climbed out of them.
Trevor! cried Neville blissfully, holding out his hands. Then they
clambered up a passageway in the rock after Hagrids lamp, coming out at last
onto smooth, damp grass right in the shadow of the castle.
They walked up a flight of stone steps and crowded around the huge, oak
front door.
Everyone here? You there, still got yer toad?
Hagrid raised a gigantic fist and knocked three times on the castle door.
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER SEVEN
THE SORTING HAT
T he door swung open at once. A tall, black-haired witch in emerald-green
robes stood there. She had a very stern face and Harrys first thought was that
this was not someone to cross.
The firs years, Professor McGonagall, said Hagrid.
Thank you, Hagrid. I will take them from here.
She pulled the door wide. The entrance hall was so big you could have fit
the whole of the Dursleys house in it. The stone walls were lit with flaming
torches like the ones at Gringotts, the ceiling was too high to make out, and a
magnificent marble staircase facing them led to the upper floors.
They followed Professor McGonagall across the flagged stone floor.
Harry could hear the drone of hundreds of voices from a doorway to the right 
the rest of the school must already be here  but Professor McGonagall showed
the first years into a small, empty chamber off the hall. They crowded in,
standing rather closer together than they would usually have done, peering about
nervously.
Welcome to Hogwarts, said Professor McGonagall. The start-of-term
banquet will begin shortly, but before you take your seats in the Great Hall, you
will be sorted into your houses. The Sorting is a very important ceremony
because, while you are here, your house will be something like your family
within Hogwarts. You will have classes with the rest of your house, sleep in your
house dormitory, and spend free time in your house common room.
The four houses are called Gryffindor, Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, and
Slytherin. Each house has its own noble history and each has produced
outstanding witches and wizards. While you are at Hogwarts, your triumphs will
earn your house points, while any rulebreaking will lose house points. At the end
of the year, the house with the most points is awarded the house cup, a great
honor. I hope each of you will be a credit to whichever house becomes yours.
The Sorting Ceremony will take place in a few minutes in front of the
rest of the school. I suggest you all smarten yourselves up as much as you can
while you are waiting.
Her eyes lingered for a moment on Nevilles cloak, which was fastened
under his left ear, and on Rons smudged nose. Harry nervously tried to flatten
his hair.
I shall return when we are ready for you, said Professor McGonagall.
Please wait quietly.
She left the chamber. Harry swallowed.
How exactly do they sort us into houses? he asked Ron.
Some sort of test, I think. Fred said it hurts a lot, but I think he was
joking.
Harrys heart gave a horrible jolt. A test? In front of the whole school?
But he didnt know any magic yet what on earth would he have to do? He
hadnt expected something like this the moment they arrived. He looked around
anxiously and saw that everyone else looked terrified, too. No one was talking
much except Hermione Granger, who was whispering very fast about all the
spells shed learned and wondering which one shed need. Harry tried hard not
to listen to her. Hed never been more nervous, never, not even when hed had to
take a school report home to the Dursleys saying that hed somehow turned his
teachers wig blue. He kept his eyes fixed on the door. Any second now,
Professor McGonagall would come back and lead him to his doom.
Then something happened that made him jump about a foot in the air 
several people behind him screamed.
What the ?
He gasped. So did the people around him. About twenty ghosts had just
streamed through the back wall. Pearly-white and slightly transparent, they
glided across the room talking to one another and hardly glancing at the first
years. They seemed to be arguing. What looked like a fat little monk was saying:
Forgive and forget, I say, we ought to give him a second chance 
My dear Friar, havent we given Peeves all the chances he deserves? He
gives us all a bad name and you know, hes not really even a ghost  I say, what
are you all doing here?
A ghost wearing a ruff and tights had suddenly noticed the first years.
Nobody answered.
New students! said the Fat Friar, smiling around at them. About to be
Sorted, I suppose?
A few people nodded mutely.
Hope to see you in Hufflepuff! said the Friar. My old house, you
know.
Move along now, said a sharp voice. The Sorting Ceremonys about
to start.
Professor McGonagall had returned. One by one, the ghosts floated away
through the opposite wall.
Now, form a line, Professor McGonagall told the first years, and
follow me.
Feeling oddly as though his legs had turned to lead, Harry got into line
behind a boy with sandy hair, with Ron behind him, and they walked out of the
chamber, back across the hall, and through a pair of double doors into the Great
Hall.
Harry had never even imagined such a strange and splendid place. It was
lit by thousands and thousands of candles that were floating in midair over four
long tables, where the rest of the students were sitting. These tables were laid
with glittering golden plates and goblets. At the top of the hall was another long
table where the teachers were sitting. Professor McGonagall led the first years
up here, so that they came to a halt in a line facing the other students, with the
teachers behind them. The hundreds of faces staring at them looked like pale
lanterns in the flickering candlelight. Dotted here and there among the students,
the ghosts shone misty silver. Mainly to avoid all the staring eyes, Harry looked
upward and saw a velvety black ceiling dotted with stars. He heard Hermione
whisper, Its bewitched to look like the sky outside. I read about it in Hogwarts,
A History.
It was hard to believe there was a ceiling there at all, and that the Great
Hall didnt simply open on to the heavens.
Harry quickly looked down again as Professor McGonagall silently
placed a four-legged stool in front of the first years. On top of the stool she put a
pointed wizards hat. This hat was patched and frayed and extremely dirty. Aunt
Petunia wouldnt have let it in the house.
Maybe they had to try and get a rabbit out of it, Harry thought wildly,
that seemed the sort of thing  noticing that everyone in the hall was now
staring at the hat, he stared at it, too. For a few seconds, there was complete
silence. Then the hat twitched. A rip near the brim opened wide like a mouth 
and the hat began to sing:
Oh, you may not think Im pretty,
But dont judge on what you see,
Ill eat myself if you can find
A smarter hat than me.
You can keep your bowlers black,
Your top hats sleek and tall,
For Im the Hogwarts Sorting Hat
And I can cap them all.
Theres nothing hidden in your head
The Sorting Hat cant see,
So try me on and I will tell you
Where you ought to be.
You might belong in Gryffindor,
Where dwell the brave at heart,
Their daring, nerve, and chivalry
Set Gryffindors apart;
You might belong in Hufflepuff,
Where they are just and loyal,
Those patient Hufflepuffs are true
And unafraid of toil;
Or yet in wise old Ravenclaw,
if youve a ready mind,
Where those of wit and learning,
Will always find their kind;
Or perhaps in Slytherin
Youll make your real friends,
Those cunning folk use any means
To achieve their ends.
So put me on! Dont be afraid!
And dont get in a flap!
Youre in safe hands (though I have none)
For Im a Thinking Cap!
The whole hall burst into applause as the hat finished its song. It bowed to
each of the four tables and then became quite still again.
So weve just got to try on the hat! Ron whispered to Harry. Ill kill
Fred, he was going on about wrestling a troll.
Harry. smiled weakly. Yes, trying on the hat was a lot better than having
to do a spell, but he did wish they could have tried it on without everyone
watching. The hat seemed to be asking rather a lot; Harry didnt feel brave or
quick-witted or any of it at the moment. If only the hat had mentioned a house
for people who felt a bit queasy, that would have been the one for him.
Professor McGonagall now stepped forward holding a long roll of
parchment.
When I call your name, you will put on the hat and sit on the stool to be
sorted, she said. Abbott, Hannah!
A pink-faced girl with blonde pigtails stumbled out of line, put on the
hat, which fell right down over her eyes, and sat down. A moments pause 
HUFFLEPUFF! shouted the hat.
The table on the right cheered and clapped as Hannah went to sit down at
the Hufflepuff table. Harry saw the ghost of the Fat Friar waving merrily at her.
Bones, Susan!
HUFFLEPUFF! shouted the hat again, and Susan scuttled off to sit
next to Hannah.
Boot, Terry!
RAVENCLAW!
The table second from the left clapped this time; several Ravenclaws
stood up to shake hands with Terry as he joined them.
Brocklehurst, Mandy went to Ravenclaw too, but Brown, Lavender
became the first new Gryffindor, and the table on the far left exploded with
cheers; Harry could see Rons twin brothers catcalling.
Bulstrode, Millicent then became a Slytherin. Perhaps it was Harrys
imagination, after all hed heard about Slytherin, but he thought they looked like
an unpleasant lot.
He was starting to feel definitely sick now. He remembered being picked
for teams during gym at his old school. He had always been last to be chosen,
not because he was no good, but because no one wanted Dudley to think they
liked him.
Finch-Fletchley, Justin!
HUFFLEPUFF!
Sometimes, Harry noticed, the hat shouted out the house at once, but at
others it took a little while to decide. Finnigan, Seamus, the sandy-haired boy
next to Harry in the line, sat on the stool for almost a whole minute before the
hat declared him a Gryffindor.
Granger, Hermione!
Her mione almost ran to the stool and jammed the hat eagerly on her
head.
GRYFFINDOR! shouted the hat. Ron groaned.
A horrible thought struck Harry, as horrible thoughts always do when
youre very nervous. What if he wasnt chosen at all? What if he just sat there
with the hat over his eyes for ages, until Professor McGonagall jerked it off his
head and said there had obviously been a mistake and hed better get back on the
train?
When Neville Longbottom, the boy who kept losing his toad, was called,
he fell over on his way to the stool. The hat took a long time to decide with
Neville. When it finally shouted, GRYFFINDOR, Neville ran off still wearing
it, and had to jog back amid gales of laughter to give it to MacDougal, Morag.
Malfoy swaggered forward when his name was called and got his wish at
once: the hat had barely touched his head when it screamed, SLYTHERIN!
Malfoy went to join his friends Crabbe and Goyle, looking pleased with
himself.
There werent many people left now. Moon, Nott,
Parkinson, then a pair of twin girls, Patil and Patil, then Perks,
Sally-Anne, and then, at last 
Potter, Harry!
As Harry stepped forward, whispers suddenly broke out like little hissing
fires all over the hall.
Potter, did she say?
The Harry Potter?
The last thing Harry saw before the hat dropped over his eyes was the
hall full of people craning to get a good look at him. Next second he was looking
at the black inside of the hat. He waited.
Hmm, said a small voice in his ear. Difficult. Very difficult. Plenty of
courage, I see. Not a bad mind either. Theres talent, A my goodness, yes  and
a nice thirst to prove yourself, now thats interesting.So where shall I put
you?
Harry gripped the edges of the stool and thought, Not Slytherin, not
Slytherin.
Not Slytherin, eh? said the small voice. Are you sure? You could be
great, you know, its all here in your head, and Slytherin will help you on the
way to greatness, no doubt about that  no? Well, if youre sure  better be
GRYFFINDOR!
Harry heard the hat shout the last word to the whole hall. He took off the
hat and walked shakily toward the Gryffindor table. He was so relieved to have
been chosen and not put in Slytherin, he hardly noticed that he was getting the
loudest cheer yet. Percy the Prefect got up and shook his hand vigorously, while
the Weasley twins yelled, We got Potter! We got Potter! Harry sat down
opposite the ghost in the ruff hed seen earlier. The ghost patted his arm, giving
Harry the sudden, horrible feeling hed just plunged it into a bucket of ice-cold
water.
He could see the High Table properly now. At the end nearest him sat
Hagrid, who caught his eye and gave him the thumbs up. Harry grinned back.
And there, in the center of the High Table, in a large gold chair, sat Albus
Dumbledore. Harry recognized him at once from the card hed gotten out of the
Chocolate Frog on the train. Dumbledores silver hair was the only thing in the
whole hall that shone as brightly as the ghosts. Harry spotted Professor Quirrell,
too, the nervous young man from the Leaky Cauldron. He was looking very
peculiar in a large purple turban.
And now there were only three people left to be sorted. Thomas, Dean,
a Black boy even taller than Ron, joined Harry at the Gryffindor table. Turpin,
Lisa, became a Ravenclaw and then it was Rons turn. He was pale green by
now. Harry crossed his fingers under the table and a second later the hat had
shouted, GRYFFINDOR!
Harry clapped loudly with the rest as Ron collapsed into the chair next to
him.
Well done, Ron, excellent, said Percy Weasley pompously across Harry
as Zabini, Blaise, was made a Slytherin. Professor McGonagall rolled up her
scroll and took the Sorting Hat away.
Harry looked down at his empty gold plate. He had only just realized
how hungry he was. The pumpkin pasties seemed ages ago.
Albus Dumbledore had gotten to his feet. He was beaming at the
students, his arms opened wide, as if nothing could have pleased him more than
to see them all there.
Welcome, he said. Welcome to a new year at Hogwarts! Before we
begin our banquet, I would like to say a few words. And here they are: Nitwit!
Blubber! Oddment! Tweak!
Thank you!
He sat back down. Everybody clapped and cheered. Harry didnt know
whether to laugh or not.
Is he  a bit mad? he asked Percy uncertainly.
Mad? said Percy airily. Hes a genius! Best wizard in the world! But
he is a bit mad, yes. Potatoes, Harry?
Harrys mouth fell open. The dishes in front of him were now piled with
food. He had never seen so many things he liked to eat on one table: roast beef,
roast chicken, pork chops and lamb chops, sausages, bacon and steak, boiled
potatoes, roast potatoes, fries, Yorkshire pudding, peas, carrots, gravy, ketchup,
and, for some strange reason, peppermint humbugs.
The Dursleys had never exactly starved Harry, but hed never been
allowed to eat as much as he liked. Dudley had always taken anything that Harry
really wanted, even if It made him sick. Harry piled his plate with a bit of
everything except the peppermints and began to eat. It was all delicious.
That does look good, said the ghost in the ruff sadly, watching Harry
cut up his steak.
Cant you ?
I havent eaten for nearly five hundred years, said the ghost. I dont
need to, of course, but one does miss it. I dont think Ive introduced myself? Sir
Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington at your service. Resident ghost of Gryffindor
Tower.
I know who you are! said Ron suddenly. My brothers told me about
you  youre Nearly Headless Nick!
I would prefer you to call me Sir Nicholas de Mimsy  the ghost
began stiffly, but sandy-haired Seamus Finnigan interrupted.
Nearly Headless? How can you be nearly headless?
Sir Nicholas looked extremely miffed, as if their little chat wasnt going
at all the way he wanted.
Like this, he said irritably. He seized his left ear and pulled. His whole
head swung off his neck and fell onto his shoulder as if it was on a hinge.
Someone had obviously tried to behead him, but not done it properly. Looking
pleased at the stunned looks on their faces, Nearly Headless Nick flipped his
head back onto his neck, coughed, and said, So  new Gryffindors! I hope
youre going to help us win the house championship this year? Gryffindors have
never gone so long without winning. Slytherins have got the cup six years in a
row! The Bloody Barons becoming almost unbearable  hes the Slytherin
ghost.
Harry looked over at the Slytherin table and saw a horrible ghost sitting
there, with blank staring eyes, a gaunt face, and robes stained with silver blood.
He was right next to Malfoy who, Harry was pleased to see, didnt look too
pleased with the seating arrangements.
How did he get covered in blood? asked Seamus with great interest.
Ive never asked, said Nearly Headless Nick delicately.
When everyone had eaten as much as they could, the remains of the food
faded from the plates, leaving them sparkling clean as before. A moment later
the desserts appeared. Blocks of ice cream in every flavor you could think of,
apple pies, treacle tarts, chocolate eclairs and jam doughnuts, trifle, strawberries,
Jell-O, rice pudding
As Harry helped himself to a treacle tart, the talk turned to their families.
Im half-and-half, said Seamus. Me dads a Muggle. Mom didnt tell
him she was a witch til after they were married. Bit of a nasty shock for him.
The others laughed.
What about you, Neville? said Ron.
Well, my gran brought me up and shes a witch, said Neville, but the
family thought I was all-Muggle for ages. My Great Uncle Algie kept trying to
catch me off my guard and force some magic out of me  he pushed me off the
end of Blackpool pier once, I nearly drowned  but nothing happened until I
was eight. Great Uncle Algie came round for dinner, and he was hanging me out
of an upstairs window by the ankles when my Great Auntie Enid offered him a
meringue and he accidentally let go. But I bounced  all the way down the
garden and into the road. They were all really pleased, Gran was crying, she was
so happy. And you should have seen their faces when I got in here  they
thought I might not be magic enough to come, you see. Great Uncle Algie was
so pleased he bought me my toad.
On Harrys other side, Percy Weasley and Hermione were talking about
lessons (I do hope they start right away, theres so much to learn, Im
particularly interested in Transfiguration, you know, turning something into
something else, of course, its supposed to be very difficult ; Youll be
starting small, just matches into needles and that sort of thing  ).
Harry, who was starting to feel warm and sleepy, looked up at the High
Table again. Hagrid was drinking deeply from his goblet. Professor McGonagall
was talking to Professor Dumbledore. Professor Quirrell, in his absurd turban,
was talking to a teacher with greasy black hair, a hooked nose, and sallow skin.
It happened very suddenly. The hook-nosed teacher looked past
Quirrells turban straight into Harrys eyes  and a sharp, hot pain shot across
the scar on Harrys forehead.
Ouch! Harry clapped a hand to his head.
What is it? asked Percy.
N-nothing.
The pain had gone as quickly as it had come. Harder to shake off was the
feeling Harry had gotten from the teachers look  a feeling that he didnt like
Harry at all.
Whos that teacher talking to Professor Quirrell? he asked Percy.
Oh, you know Quirrell already, do you? No wonder hes looking so
nervous, thats Professor Snape. He teaches Potions, but he doesnt want to 
everyone knows hes after Quirrells job. Knows an awful lot about the Dark
Arts, Snape.
Harry watched Snape for a while, but Snape didnt look at him again.
At last, the desserts too disappeared, and Professor Dumbledore got to
his feet again. The hall fell silent.
Ahem  just a few more words now that we are all fed and watered. I
have a few start-of-term notices to give you.
First years should note that the forest on the grounds is forbidden to all
pupils. And a few of our older students would do well to remember that as well.
Dumbledores twinkling eyes flashed in the direction of the Weasley
twins.
I have also been asked by Mr. Filch, the caretaker, to remind you all that
no magic should be used between classes in the corridors.
Quidditch trials will be held in the second week of the term. Anyone
interested in playing for their house teams should contact Madam Hooch.
And finally, I must tell you that this year, the third-floor corridor on the
right-hand side is out of bounds to everyone who does not wish to die a very
painful death.
Harry laughed, but he was one of the few who did.
Hes not serious? he muttered to Percy.
Must be, said Percy, frowning at Dumbledore. Its odd, because he
usually gives us a reason why were not allowed to go somewhere  the forests
full of dangerous beasts, everyone knows that. I do think he might have told us
prefects, at least.
And now, before we go to bed, let us sing the school song! cried
Dumbledore. Harry noticed that the other teachers smiles had become rather
fixed.
Dumbledore gave his wand a little flick, as if he was trying to get a fly
off the end, and a long golden ribbon flew out of it, which rose high above the
tables and twisted itself, snakelike, into words.
Everyone pick their favorite tune, said Dumbledore, and off we go!
And the school bellowed:
Hogwarts, Hogwarts, Hoggy Warty Hogwarts,
Teach us something please,
Whether we be old and bald
Or young with scabby knees,
Our heads could do with filling
With some interesting stuff,
For now theyre bare and full of air,
Dead flies and bits of fluff,
So teach us things worth knowing,
Bring back what weve forgot,
just do your best, well do the rest,
And learn until our brains all rot.
Everybody finished the song at different times. At last, only the Weasley
twins were left singing along to a very slow funeral march. Dumbledore
conducted their last few lines with his wand and when they had finished, he was
one of those who clapped loudest.
Ah, music, he said, wiping his eyes. A magic beyond all we do here!
And now, bedtime. Off you trot!
The Gryffindor first years followed Percy through the chattering crowds,
out of the Great Hall, and up the marble staircase. Harrys legs were like lead
again, but only because he was so tired and full of food. He was too sleepy even
to be surprised that the people in the portraits along the corridors whispered and
pointed as they passed, or that twice Percy led them through doorways hidden
behind sliding panels and hanging tapestries. They climbed more staircases,
yawning and dragging their feet, and Harry was just wondering how much
farther they had to go when they came to a sudden halt.
A bundle of walking sticks was floating in midair ahead of them, and as
Percy took a step toward them they started throwing themselves at him.
Peeves, Percy whispered to the first years. A poltergeist. He raised
his voice, Peeves  show yourself.
A loud, rude sound, like the air being let out of a balloon, answered.
Do you want me to go to the Bloody Baron?
There was a pop, and a little man with wicked, dark eyes and a wide
mouth appeared, floating cross-legged in the air, clutching the walking sticks.
Oooooooh! he said, with an evil cackle. Ickle Firsties! What fun!
He swooped suddenly at them. They all ducked.
Go away, Peeves, or the Baronll hear about this, I mean it! barked
Percy.
Peeves stuck out his tongue and vanished, dropping the walking sticks on
Nevilles head. They heard him zooming away, rattling coats of armor as he
passed.
You want to watch out for Peeves, said Percy, as they set off again.
The Bloody Barons the only one who can control him, he wont even listen to
us prefects. Here we are.
At the very end of the corridor hung a portrait of a very fat woman in a
pink silk dress.
Password? she said.
Caput Draconis, said Percy, and the portrait swung forward to reveal a
round hole in the wall. They all scrambled through it  Neville needed a leg up
 and found themselves in the Gryffindor common room, a cozy, round room
full of squashy armchairs.
Percy directed the girls through one door to their dormitory and the boys
through another. At the top of a spiral staircase  they were obviously in one of
the towers  they found their beds at last: five four-posters hung with deep red,
velvet curtains. Their trunks had already been brought up. Too tired to talk
much, they pulled on their pajamas and fell into bed.
Great food, isnt it? Ron muttered to Harry through the hangings. Get
off, Scabbers! Hes chewing my sheets.
Harry was going to ask Ron if hed had any of the treacle tart, but he fell
asleep almost at once.
Perhaps Harry had eaten a bit too much, because he had a very strange
dream. He was wearing Professor Quirrells turban, which kept talking to him,
telling him he must transfer to Slytherin at once, because it was his destiny.
Harry told the turban he didnt want to be in Slytherin; it got heavier and
heavier; he tried to pull it off but it tightened painfully  and there was Malfoy,
laughing at him as he struggled with it  then Malfoy turned into the hooknosed
teacher, Snape, whose laugh became high and cold  there was a burst of
green light and Harry woke, sweating and shaking.
He rolled over and fell asleep again, and when he woke next day, he
didnt remember the dream at all.
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER EIGHT
THE POTIONS MASTER
T here, look.
Where?
Next to the tall kid with the red hair.
Wearing the glasses?
Did you see his face?
Did you see his scar?
Whispers followed Harry from the moment he left his dormitory the next
day. People lining up outside classrooms stood on tiptoe to get a look at him, or
doubled back to pass him in the corridors again, staring. Harry wished they
wouldnt, because he was trying to concentrate on finding his way to classes.
There were a hundred and forty-two staircases at Hogwarts: wide,
sweeping ones; narrow, rickety ones; some that led somewhere different on a
Friday; some with a vanishing step halfway up that you had to remember to
jump. Then there were doors that wouldnt open unless you asked politely, or
tickled them in exactly the right place, and doors that werent really doors at all,
but solid walls just pretending. It was also very hard to remember where
anything was, because it all seemed to move around a lot. The people in the
portraits kept going to visit each other, and Harry was sure the coats of armor
could walk.
The ghosts didnt help, either. It was always a nasty shock when one of
them glided suddenly through a door you were trying to open. Nearly Headless
Nick was always happy to point new Gryffindors in the right direction, but
Peeves the Poltergeist was worth two locked doors and a trick staircase if you
met him when you were late for class. He would drop wastepaper baskets on
your head, pull rugs from under your feet, pelt you with bits of chalk, or sneak
up behind you, invisible, grab your nose, and screech, GOT YOUR CONK!
Even worse than Peeves, if that was possible, was the caretaker, Argus
Filch. Harry and Ron managed to get on the wrong side of him on their very first
morning. Filch found them trying to force their way through a door that
unluckily turned out to be the entrance to the out-of-bounds corridor on the third
floor. He wouldnt believe they were lost, was sure they were trying to break into
it on purpose, and was threatening to lock them in the dungeons when they were
rescued by Professor Quirrell, who was passing.
Filch owned a cat called Mrs. Norris, a scrawny, dust-colored creature
with bulging, lamp like eyes just like Filchs. She patrolled the corridors alone.
Break a rule in front of her, put just one toe out of line, and shed whisk off for
Filch, whod appear, wheezing, two seconds later. Filch knew the secret
passageways of the school better than anyone (except perhaps the Weasley
twins) and could pop up as suddenly as any of the ghosts. The students all hated
him, and it was the dearest ambition of many to give Mrs. Norris a good kick.
And then, once you had managed to find them, there were the classes
themselves. There was a lot more to magic, as Harry quickly found out, than
waving your wand and saying a few funny words.
They had to study the night skies through their telescopes every
Wednesday at midnight and learn the names of different stars and the movements
of the planets. Three times a week they went out to the greenhouses behind the
castle to study Herbology, with a dumpy little witch called Professor Sprout,
where they learned how to take care of all the strange plants and fungi, and
found out what they were used for. Easily the most boring class was History of
Magic, which was the only one taught by a ghost. Professor Binns had been very
old indeed when he had fallen asleep in front of the staff room fire and got up
next morning to teach, leaving his body behind him. Binns droned on and on
while they scribbled down names and dates, and got Emetic the Evil and Uric
the Oddball mixed up.
Professor Flitwick, the Charms teacher, was a tiny little wizard who had
to stand on a pile of books to see over his desk. At the start of their first class he
took the roll call, and when he reached Harrys name he gave an excited squeak
and toppled out of sight.
Professor McGonagall was again different. Harry had been quite right to
think she wasnt a teacher to cross. Strict and clever, she gave them a talking-to
the moment they sat down in her first class.
Transfiguration is some of the most complex and dangerous magic you
will learn at Hogwarts, she said. Anyone messing around in my class will
leave and not come back. You have been warned.
Then she changed her desk into a pig and back again. They were all very
impressed and couldnt wait to get started, but soon realized they werent going
to be changing the furniture into animals for a long time. After taking a lot of
complicated notes, they were each given a match and started trying to turn it into
a needle. By the end of the lesson, only Hermione Granger had made any
difference to her match; Professor McGonagall showed the class how it had gone
all silver and pointy and gave Hermione a rare smile.
The class everyone had really been looking forward to was Defense
Against the Dark Arts, but Quirrells lessons turned out to be a bit of a joke. His
classroom smelled strongly of garlic, which everyone said was to ward off a
vampire hed met in Romania and was afraid would be coming back to get him
one of these days. His turban, he told them, had been given to him by an African
prince as a thank-you for getting rid of a troublesome zombie, but they werent
sure they believed this story. For one thing, when Seamus Finnigan asked
eagerly to hear how Quirrell had fought off the zombie, Quirrell went pink and
started talking about the weather; for another, they had noticed that a funny smell
hung around the turban, and the Weasley twins insisted that it was stuffed full of
garlic as well, so that Quirrell was protected wherever he went.
Harry was very relieved to find out that he wasnt miles behind everyone
else. Lots of people had come from Muggle families and, like him, hadnt had
any idea that they were witches and wizards. There was so much to learn that
even people like Ron didnt have much of a head start.
Friday was an important day for Harry and Ron. They finally managed to
find their way down to the Great Hall for breakfast without getting lost once.
What have we got today? Harry asked Ron as he poured sugar on his
porridge.
Double Potions with the Slytherins, said Ron. Snapes Head of
Slytherin House. They say he always favors them  well be able to see if its
true.
Wish McGonagall favored us, said Harry. Professor McGonagall was
head of Gryffindor House, but it hadnt stopped her from giving them a huge pile
of homework the day before.
Just then, the mail arrived. Harry had gotten used to this by now, but it
had given him a bit of a shock on the first morning, when about a hundred owls
had suddenly streamed into the Great Hall during breakfast, circling the tables
until they saw their owners, and dropping letters and packages onto their laps.
Hedwig hadnt brought Harry anything so far. She sometimes flew in to
nibble his ear and have a bit of toast before going off to sleep in the owlery with
the other school owls. This morning, however, she fluttered down between the
marmalade and the sugar bowl and dropped a note onto Harrys plate. Harry tore
it open at once. It said, in a very untidy scrawl:
Dear Harry,
I know you get Friday afternoons off, so would you like to come and have a
cup of tea with me around three?
I want to hear all about your first week. Send us an answer back with
Hedwig.
Hagrid
Harry borrowed Rons quill, scribbled Yes, please, see you later on the back
of the note, and sent Hedwig off again.
It was lucky that Harry had tea with Hagrid to look forward to, because
the Potions lesson turned out to be the worst thing that had happened to him so
far.
At the start-of-term banquet, Harry had gotten the idea that Professor
Snape disliked him. By the end of the first Potions lesson, he knew hed been
wrong. Snape didnt dislike Harry  he hated him.
Potions lessons took place down in one of the dungeons. It was colder
here than up in the main castle, and would have been quite creepy enough
without the pickled animals floating in glass jars all around the walls.
Snape, like Flitwick, started the class by taking the roll call, and like
Flitwick, he paused at Harrys name.
Ah, Yes, he said softly, Harry Potter. Our new  celebrity.
Draco Malfoy and his friends Crabbe and Goyle sniggered behind their
hands. Snape finished calling the names and looked up at the class. His eyes
were black like Hagrids, but they had none of Hagrids warmth. They were cold
and empty and made you think of dark tunnels.
You are here to learn the subtle science and exact art of potionmaking,
he began. He spoke in barely more than a whisper, but they caught every word
 like Professor McGonagall, Snape had the gift of keeping a class silent
without effort. As there is little foolish wand-waving here, many of you will
hardly believe this is magic. I dont expect you will really understand the beauty
of the softly simmering cauldron with its shimmering fumes, the delicate power
of liquids that creep through human veins, bewitching the mind, ensnaring the
senses.I can teach you how to bottle fame, brew glory, even stopper death 
if you arent as big a bunch of dunderheads as I usually have to teach.
More silence followed this little speech. Harry and Ron exchanged looks
with raised eyebrows. Hermione Granger was on the edge of her seat and looked
desperate to start proving that she wasnt a dunderhead.
Potter! said Snape suddenly. What would I get if I added powdered
root of asphodel to an infusion of wormwood?
Powdered root of what to an infusion of what? Harry glanced at Ron,
who looked as stumped as he was; Hermiones hand had shot into the air.
I dont know, sir, said Harry.
Snapes lips curled into a sneer.
Tut, tut  fame clearly isnt everything.
He ignored Hermiones hand.
Lets try again. Potter, where would you look if I told you to find me a
bezoar?
Hermione stretched her hand as high into the air as it would go without
her leaving her seat, but Harry didnt have the faintest idea what a bezoar was.
He tried not to look at Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle, who were shaking with
laughter.
I dont know, sir.
Thought you wouldnt open a book before coming, eh, Potter? Harry
forced himself to keep looking straight into those cold eyes. He had looked
through his books at the Dursleys, but did Snape expect him to remember
everything in One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi?
Snape was still ignoring Hermiones quivering hand.
What is the difference, Potter, between monkshood and wolfsbane?
At this, Hermione stood up, her hand stretching toward the dungeon
ceiling.
I dont know, said Harry quietly. I think Hermione does, though, why
dont you try her?
A few people laughed; Harry caught Seamuss eye, and Seamus winked.
Snape, however, was not pleased.
Sit down, he snapped at Hermione. For your information, Potter,
asphodel and wormwood make a sleeping potion so powerful it is known as the
Draught of Living Death. A bezoar is a stone taken from the stomach of a goat
and it will save you from most poisons. As for monkshood and wolfsbane, they
are the same plant, which also goes by the name of aconite. Well? Why arent
you all copying that down?
There was a sudden rummaging for quills and parchment. Over the noise,
Snape said, And a point will be taken from Gryffindor House for your cheek,
Potter.
Things didnt improve for the Gryffindors as the Potions lesson
continued. Snape put them all into pairs and set them to mixing up a simple
potion to cure boils. He swept around in his long black cloak, watching them
weigh dried nettles and crush snake fangs, criticizing almost everyone except
Malfoy, whom he seemed to like. He was just telling everyone to look at the
perfect way Malfoy had stewed his horned slugs when clouds of acid green
smoke and a loud hissing filled the dungeon. Neville had somehow managed to
melt Seamuss cauldron into a twisted blob, and their potion was seeping across
the stone floor, burning holes in peoples shoes. Within seconds, the whole class
was standing on their stools while Neville, who had been drenched in the potion
when the cauldron collapsed, moaned in pain as angry red boils sprang up all
over his arms and legs.
Idiot boy! snarled Snape, clearing the spilled potion away with one
wave of his wand. I suppose you added the porcupine quills before taking the
cauldron off the fire?
Neville whimpered as boils started to pop up all over his nose.
Take him up to the hospital wing, Snape spat at Seamus. Then he
rounded on Harry and Ron, who had been working next to Neville.
You  Potter  why didnt you tell him not to add the quills? Thought
hed make you look good if he got it wrong, did you? Thats another point
youve lost for Gryffindor.
This was so unfair that Harry opened his mouth to argue, but Ron kicked
him behind their cauldron.
Dont push it, he muttered, Ive heard Snape can turn very nasty.
As they climbed the steps out of the dungeon an hour later, Harrys mind
was racing and his spirits were low. Hed lost two points for Gryffindor in his
very first week  why did Snape hate him so much?
Cheer up, said Ron, Snapes always taking points off Fred and
George. Can I come and meet Hagrid with you?
At five to three they left the castle and made their way across the
grounds. Hagrid lived in a small wooden house on the edge of the forbidden
forest. A crossbow and a pair of galoshes were outside the front door.
When Harry knocked they heard a frantic scrabbling from inside and
several booming barks. Then Hagrids voice rang out, saying, Back, Fang 
back.
Hagrids big, hairy face appeared in the crack as he pulled the door open.
Hang on, he said. Back, Fang.
He let them in, struggling to keep a hold on the collar of an enormous
black boarhound.
There was only one room inside. Hams and pheasants were hanging from
the ceiling, a copper kettle was boiling on the open fire, and in the corner stood a
massive bed with a patchwork quilt over it.
Make yerselves at home, said Hagrid, letting go of Fang, who bounded
straight at Ron and started licking his ears. Like Hagrid, Fang was clearly not as
fierce as he looked.
This is Ron, Harry told Hagrid, who was pouring boiling water into a
large teapot and putting rock cakes onto a plate.
Another Weasley, eh? said Hagrid, glancing at Rons freckles. I spent
half me life chasin yer twin brothers away from the forest.
The rock cakes were shapeless lumps with raisins that almost broke their
teeth, but Harry and Ron pretended to be enjoying them as they told Hagrid all
about their first lessons. Fang rested his head on Harrys knee and drooled all
over his robes.
Harry and Ron were delighted to hear Hagrid call Filch that old git.
An as fer that cat, Mrs. Norris, Id like ter introduce her to Fang
sometime. Dyeh know, every time I go up ter the school, she follows me
everywhere? Cant get rid of her  Filch puts her up to it.
Harry told Hagrid about Snapes lesson. Hagrid, like Ron, told Harry not
to worry about it, that Snape liked hardly any of the students.
But he seemed to really hate me.
Rubbish! said Hagrid. Why should he?
Yet Harry couldnt help thinking that Hagrid didnt quite meet his eyes
when he said that.
Hows yer brother Charlie? Hagrid asked Ron. I liked him a lot 
great with animals.
Harry wondered if Hagrid had changed the subject on purpose. While
Ron told Hagrid all about Charlies work with dragons, Harry picked up a piece
of paper that was lying on the table under the tea cozy. It was a cutting from the
Daily Prophet:
GRINGOTTS BREAK-IN LATEST
Investigations continue into the break-in at Gringotts on 31 July, widely
believed to be the work of Dark wizards or witches unknown.
Gringotts goblins today insisted that nothing had been taken. The vault that
was searched had in fact been emptied the same day.
But were not telling you what was in there, so keep your noses out if you
know whats good for you, said a Gringotts spokesgoblin this afternoon.
Harry remembered Ron telling him on the train that someone had tried to rob
Gringotts, but Ron hadnt mentioned the date.
Hagrid! said Harry, that Gringotts break-in happened on my birthday!
It mightve been happening while we were there!
There was no doubt about it, Hagrid definitely didnt meet Harrys eyes
this time. He grunted and offered him another rock cake. Harry read the story
again. The vault that was searched had in fact been emptied earlier that same
day. Hagrid had emptied vault seven hundred and thirteen, if you could call it
emptying, taking out that grubby little package. Had that been what the thieves
were looking for?
As Harry and Ron walked back to the castle for dinner, their pockets
weighed down with rock cakes theyd been too polite to refuse, Harry thought
that none of the lessons hed had so far had given him as much to think about as
tea with Hagrid. Had Hagrid collected that package just in time? Where was it
now? And did Hagrid know something about Snape that he didnt want to tell
Harry?
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER NINE
THE MIDNIGHT DUEL
H arry had never believed he would meet a boy he hated more than Dudley,
but that was before he met Draco Malfoy. Still, first-year Gryffindors only had
Potions with the Slytherins, so they didnt have to put up with Malfoy much. Or
at least, they didnt until they spotted a notice pinned up in the Gryffindor
common room that made them all groan. Flying lessons would be starting on
Thursday  and Gryffindor and Slytherin would be learning together.
Typical, said Harry darkly. Just what I always wanted. To make a fool
of myself on a broomstick in front of Malfoy.
He had been looking forward to learning to fly more than anything else.
You dont know that youll make a fool of yourself, said Ron
reasonably. Anyway, I know Malfoys always going on about how good he is at
Quidditch, but I bet thats all talk.
Malfoy certainly did talk about flying a lot. He complained loudly about
first years never getting on the house Quidditch teams and told long, boastful
stories that always seemed to end with him narrowly escaping Muggles in
helicopters. He wasnt the only one, though: the way Seamus Finnigan told it,
hed spent most of his childhood zooming around the countryside on his
broomstick. Even Ron would tell anyone whod listen about the time hed
almost hit a hang glider on Charlies old broom. Everyone from wizarding
families talked about Quidditch constantly. Ron had already had a big argument
with Dean Thomas, who shared their dormitory, about soccer. Ron couldnt see
what was exciting about a game with only one ball where no one was allowed to
fly. Harry had caught Ron prodding Deans poster of West Ham soccer team,
trying to make the players move.
Neville had never been on a broomstick in his life, because his
grandmother had never let him near one. Privately, Harry felt shed had good
reason, because Neville managed to have an extraordinary number of accidents
even with both feet on the ground.
Hermione Granger was almost as nervous about flying as Neville was.
This was something you couldnt learn by heart out of a book  not that she
hadnt tried. At breakfast on Thursday she bored them all stupid with flying tips
shed gotten out of a library book called Quidditch Through the Ages. Neville
was hanging on to her every word, desperate for anything that might help him
hang on to his broomstick later, but everybody else was very pleased when
Hermiones lecture was interrupted by the arrival of the mail.
Harry hadnt had a single letter since Hagrids note, something that
Malfoy had been quick to notice, of course. Malfoys eagle owl was always
bringing him packages of sweets from home, which he opened gloatingly at the
Slytherin table.
A barn owl brought Neville a small package from his grandmother. He
opened it excitedly and showed them a glass ball the size of a large marble,
which seemed to be full of white smoke.
Its a Remembrall! he explained. Gran knows I forget things  this
tells you if theres something youve forgotten to do. Look, you hold it tight like
this and if it turns red  oh His face fell, because the Remembrall had
suddenly glowed scarlet, youve forgotten something.
Neville was trying to remember what hed forgotten when Draco Malfoy,
who was passing the Gryffindor table, snatched the Remembrall out of his hand.
Harry and Ron jumped to their feet. They were half hoping for a reason
to fight Malfoy, but Professor McGonagall, who could spot trouble quicker than
any teacher in the school, was there in a flash.
Whats going on?
Malfoys got my Remembrall, Professor.
Scowling, Malfoy quickly dropped the Remembrall back on the table.
Just looking, he said, and he sloped away with Crabbe and Goyle
behind him.
At three-thirty that afternoon, Harry, Ron, and the other Gryffindors hurried
down the front steps onto the grounds for their first flying lesson. It was a clear,
breezy day, and the grass rippled under their feet as they marched down the
sloping lawns toward a smooth, flat lawn on the opposite side of the grounds to
the forbidden forest, whose trees were swaying darkly in the distance.
The Slytherins were already there, and so were twenty broomsticks lying
in neat lines on the ground. Harry had heard Fred and George Weasley complain
about the school brooms, saying that some of them started to vibrate if you flew
too high, or always flew slightly to the left.
Their teacher, Madam Hooch, arrived. She had short, gray hair, and
yellow eyes like a hawk.
Well, what are you all waiting for? she barked. Everyone stand by a
broomstick. Come on, hurry up.
Harry glanced down at his broom. It was old and some of the twigs stuck
out at odd angles.
Stick out your right hand over your broom, called Madam Hooch at the
front, and say Up!
UP everyone shouted.
Harrys broom jumped into his hand at once, but it was one of the few
that did. Hermione Grangers had simply rolled over on the ground, and
Nevilles hadnt moved at all. Perhaps brooms, like horses, could tell when you
were afraid, thought Harry; there was a quaver in Nevilles voice that said only
too clearly that he wanted to keep his feet on the ground.
Madam Hooch then showed them how to mount their brooms without
sliding off the end, and walked up and down the rows correcting their grips.
Harry and Ron were delighted when she told Malfoy hed been doing it wrong
for years.
Now, when I blow my whistle, you kick off from the ground, hard, said
Madam Hooch. Keep your brooms steady, rise a few feet, and then come
straight back down by leaning forward slightly. On my whistle  three  two

But Neville, nervous and jumpy and frightened of being left on the
ground, pushed off hard before the whistle had touched Madam Hoochs lips.
Come back, boy! she shouted, but Neville was rising straight up like a
cork shot out of a bottle  twelve feet  twenty feet. Harry saw his scared
white face look down at the ground falling away, saw him gasp, slip sideways
off the broom and 
WHAM  a thud and a nasty crack and Neville lay facedown on the
grass in a heap. His broomstick was still rising higher and higher, and started to
drift lazily toward the forbidden forest and out of sight.
Madam Hooch was bending over Neville, her face as white as his.
Broken wrist, Harry heard her mutter. Come on, boy  its all right,
up you get.
She turned to the rest of the class.
None of you is to move while I take this boy to the hospital wing! You
leave those brooms where they are or youll be out of Hogwarts before you can
say Quidditch. Come on, dear.
Neville, his face tear-streaked, clutching his wrist, hobbled off with
Madam Hooch, who had her arm around him.
No sooner were they out of earshot than Malfoy burst into laughter.
Did you see his face, the great lump?
The other Slytherins joined in.
Shut up, Malfoy, snapped Parvati Patil.
Ooh, sticking up for Longbottom? said Pansy Parkinson, a hard-faced
Slytherin girl. Never thought youd like fat little crybabies, Parvati.
Look! said Malfoy, darting forward and snatching something out of the
grass. Its that stupid thing Longbottoms gran sent him.
The Remembrall glittered in the sun as he held it up.
Give that here, Malfoy, said Harry quietly. Everyone stopped talking to
watch.
Malfoy smiled nastily.
I think Ill leave it somewhere for Longbottom to find  how about 
up a tree?
Give it here! Harry yelled, but Malfoy had leapt onto his broomstick
and taken off. He hadnt been lying, he could fly well. Hovering level with the
topmost branches of an oak he called, Come and get it, Potter!
Harry grabbed his broom.
No! shouted Hermione Granger. Madam Hooch told us not to move
 youll get us all into trouble.
Harry ignored her. Blood was pounding in his ears. He mounted the
broom and kicked hard against the ground and up, up he soared; air rushed
through his hair, and his robes whipped out behind him  and in a rush of fierce
joy he realized hed found something he could do without being taught  this
was easy, this was wonderful. He pulled his broomstick up a little to take it even
higher, and heard screams and gasps of girls back on the ground and an admiring
whoop from Ron.
He turned his broomstick sharply to face Malfoy in midair. Malfoy
looked stunned.
Give it here, Harry called, or Ill knock you off that broom!
Oh, yeah? said Malfoy, trying to sneer, but looking worried.
Harry knew, somehow, what to do. He leaned forward and grasped the
broom tightly in both hands, and it shot toward Malfoy like a javelin. Malfoy
only just got out of the way in time; Harry made a sharp about-face and held the
broom steady. A few people below were clapping.
No Crabbe and Goyle up here to save your neck, Malfoy, Harry called.
The same thought seemed to have struck Malfoy.
Catch it if you can, then! he shouted, and he threw the glass ball high
into the air and streaked back toward the ground.
Harry saw, as though in slow motion, the ball rise up in the air and then
start to fall. He leaned forward and pointed his broom handle down  next
second he was gathering speed in a steep dive, racing the ball  wind whistled
in his ears, mingled with the screams of people watching  he stretched out his
hand  a foot from the ground he caught it, just in time to pull his broom
straight, and he toppled gently onto the grass with the Remembrall clutched
safely in his fist.
HARRY POTTER!
His heart sank faster than hed just dived. Professor McGonagall was
running toward them. He got to his feet, trembling.
Never  in all my time at Hogwarts 
Professor McGonagall was almost speechless with shock, and her glasses
flashed furiously,  how dare you  might have broken your neck 
It wasnt his fault, Professor 
Be quiet, Miss Patil 
But Malfoy 
Thats enough, Mr. Weasley. Potter, follow me, now.
Harry caught sight of Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyles triumphant faces as
he left, walking numbly in Professor McGonagalls wake as she strode toward
the castle. He was going to be expelled, he just knew it. He wanted to say
something to defend himself, but there seemed to be something wrong with his
voice. Professor McGonagall was sweeping along without even looking at him;
he had to jog to keep up. Now hed done it. He hadnt even lasted two weeks.
Hed be packing his bags in ten minutes. What would the Dursleys say when he
turned up on the doorstep?
Up the front steps, up the marble staircase inside, and still Professor
McGonagall didnt say a word to him. She wrenched open doors and marched
along corridors with Harry trotting miserably behind her. Maybe she was taking
him to Dumbledore. He thought of Hagrid, expelled but allowed to stay on as
gamekeeper. Perhaps he could be Hagrids assistant. His stomach twisted as he
imagined it, watching Ron and the others becoming wizards, while he stumped
around the grounds carrying Hagrids bag.
Professor McGonagall stopped outside a classroom. She opened the door
and poked her head inside.
Excuse me, Professor Flitwick, could I borrow Wood for a moment?
Wood? thought Harry, bewildered; was Wood a cane she was going to
use on him?
But Wood turned out to be a person, a burly fifth-year boy who came out
of Flitwicks class looking confused.
Follow me, you two, said Professor McGonagall, and they marched on
up the corridor, Wood looking curiously at Harry.
In here.
Professor McGonagall pointed them into a classroom that was empty
except for Peeves, who was busy writing rude words on the blackboard.
Out, Peeves! she barked. Peeves threw the chalk into a bin, which
clanged loudly, and he swooped out cursing. Professor McGonagall slammed the
door behind him and turned to face the two boys.
Potter, this is Oliver Wood. Wood  Ive found you a Seeker.
Woods expression changed from puzzlement to delight.
Are you serious, Professor?
Absolutely, said Professor McGonagall crisply. The boys a natural.
Ive never seen anything like it. Was that your first time on a broomstick,
Potter?
Harry nodded silently. He didnt have a clue what was going on, but he
didnt seem to be being expelled, and some of the feeling started coming back to
his legs.
He caught that thing in his hand after a fifty-foot dive, Professor
McGonagall told Wood. Didnt even scratch himself. Charlie Weasley couldnt
have done it.
Wood was now looking as though all his dreams had come true at once.
Ever seen a game of Quidditch, Potter? he asked excitedly.
Woods captain of the Gryffindor team, Professor McGonagall
explained.
Hes just the build for a Seeker, too, said Wood, now walking around
Harry and staring at him. Light speedy  well have to get him a decent
broom, Professor  a Nimbus Two Thousand or a Cleansweep Seven, Id say.
I shall speak to Professor Dumbledore and see if we cant bend the firstyear
rule. Heaven knows, we need a better team than last year. Flattened in that
last match by Slytherin, I couldnt look Severus Snape in the face for weeks.
Professor McGonagall peered sternly over her glasses at Harry.
I want to hear youre training hard, Potter, or I may change my mind
about punishing you.
Then she suddenly smiled.
Your father would have been proud, she said. He was an excellent
Quidditch player himself.
Youre joking.
It was dinnertime. Harry had just finished telling Ron what had happened
when hed left the grounds with Professor McGonagall. Ron had a piece of steak
and kidney pie halfway to his mouth, but hed forgotten all about it.
Seeker? he said. But first years never  you must be the youngest
house player in about 
  a century, said Harry, shoveling pie into his mouth. He felt
particularly hungry after the excitement of the afternoon. Wood told me.
Ron was so amazed, so impressed, he just sat and gaped at Harry.
I start training next week, said Harry. Only dont tell anyone, Wood
wants to keep it a secret.
Fred and George Weasley now came into the hall, spotted Harry, and
hurried over.
Well done, said George in a low voice. Wood told us. Were on the
team too  Beaters.
I tell you, were going to win that Quidditch cup for sure this year, said
Fred. We havent won since Charlie left, but this years team is going to be
brilliant. You must be good, Harry, Wood was almost skipping when he told us.
Anyway, weve got to go, Lee Jordan reckons hes found a new secret
passageway out of the school.
Bet its that one behind the statue of Gregory the Smarmy that we found
in our first week. See you.
Fred and George had hardly disappeared when someone far less welcome
turned up: Malfoy, flanked by Crabbe and Goyle.
Having a last meal, Potter? When are you getting the train back to the
Muggles?
Youre a lot braver now that youre back on the ground and youve got
your little friends with you, said Harry coolly. There was of course nothing at
all little about Crabbe and Goyle, but as the High Table was full of teachers,
neither of them could do more than crack their knuckles and scowl.
Id take you on anytime on my own, said Malfoy. Tonight, if you
want. Wizards duel. Wands only  no contact. Whats the matter? Never heard
of a wizards duel before, I suppose?
Of course he has, said Ron, wheeling around. Im his second, whos
yours?
Malfoy looked at Crabbe and Goyle, sizing them up.
Crabbe, he said. Midnight all right? Well meet you in the trophy
room; thats always unlocked.
When Malfoy had gone, Ron and Harry looked at each other.
What is a wizards duel? said Harry. And what do you mean, youre
my second?
Well, a seconds there to take over if you die, said Ron casually, getting
started at last on his cold pie. Catching the look on Harrys face, he added
quickly, But people only die in proper duels, you know, with real wizards. The
most you and Malfoyll be able to do is send sparks at each other. Neither of you
knows enough magic to do any real damage. I bet he expected you to refuse,
anyway.
And what if I wave my wand and nothing happens?
Throw it away and punch him on the nose, Ron suggested.
Excuse me.
They both looked up. It was Hermione Granger.
Cant a person eat in peace in this place? said Ron.
Hermione ignored him and spoke to Harry.
I couldnt help overhearing what you and Malfoy were saying 
Bet you could, Ron muttered.
 and you mustnt go wandering around the school at night, think of
the points youll lose Gryffindor if youre caught, and youre bound to be. Its
really very selfish of you.
And its really none of your business, said Harry.
Good-bye, said Ron.
All the same, it wasnt what youd call the perfect end to the day, Harry
thought, as he lay awake much later listening to Dean and Seamus falling asleep
(Neville wasnt back from the hospital wing). Ron had spent all evening giving
him advice such as If he tries to curse you, youd better dodge it, because I
cant remember how to block them. There was a very good chance they were
going to get caught by Filch or Mrs. Norris, and Harry felt he was pushing his
luck, breaking another school rule today. On the other hand, Malfoys sneering
face kept looming up out of the darkness  this was his big chance to beat
Malfoy face-to-face. He couldnt miss it.
Half-past eleven, Ron muttered at last, wed better go.
They pulled on their bathrobes, picked up their wands, and crept across
the tower room, down the spiral staircase, and into the Gryffindor common
room. A few embers were still glowing in the fireplace, turning all the armchairs
into hunched black shadows. They had almost reached the portrait hole when a
voice spoke from the chair nearest them, I cant believe youre going to do this,
Harry.
A lamp flickered on. It was Hermione Granger, wearing a pink bathrobe
and a frown.
You! said Ron furiously. Go back to bed!
I almost told your brother, Hermione snapped, Percy  hes a prefect,
hed put a stop to this.
Harry couldnt believe anyone could be so interfering.
Come on, he said to Ron. He pushed open the portrait of the Fat Lady
and climbed through the hole.
Hermione wasnt going to give up that easily. She followed Ron through
the portrait hole, hissing at them like an angry goose.
Dont you care about Gryffindor, do you only care about yourselves, I
dont want Slytherin to win the house cup, and youll lose all the points I got
from Professor McGonagall for knowing about Switching Spells.
Go away.
All right, but I warned you, you just remember what I said when youre
on the train home tomorrow, youre so 
But what they were, they didnt find out. Hermione had turned to the
portrait of the Fat Lady to get back inside and found herself facing an empty
painting. The Fat Lady had gone on a nighttime visit and Hermione was locked
out of Gryffindor tower.
Now what am I going to do? she asked shrilly.
Thats your problem, said Ron. Weve got to go, were going to be
late.
They hadnt even reached the end of the corridor when Hermione caught
up with them.
Im coming with you, she said.
You are not.
Dyou think Im going to stand out here and wait for Filch to catch me?
If he finds all three of us Ill tell him the truth, that I was trying to stop you, and
you can back me up.
Youve got some nerve  said Ron loudly.
Shut up, both of you! said Harry sharply. I heard something.
It was a sort of snuffling.
Mrs. Norris? breathed Ron, squinting through the dark.
It wasnt Mrs. Norris. It was Neville. He was curled up on the floor, fast
asleep, but jerked suddenly awake as they crept nearer.
Thank goodness you found me! Ive been out here for hours, I couldnt
remember the new password to get in to bed.
Keep your voice down, Neville. The passwords Pig snout but it wont
help you now, the Fat Ladys gone off somewhere.
Hows your arm? said Harry.
Fine, said Neville, showing them. Madam Pomfrey mended it in
about a minute.
Good  well, look, Neville, weve got to be somewhere, well see you
later 
Dont leave me! said Neville, scrambling to his feet, I dont want to
stay here alone, the Bloody Barons been past twice already.
Ron looked at his watch and then glared furiously at Hermione and
Neville.
If either of you get us caught, Ill never rest until Ive learned that Curse
of the Bogies Quirrell told us about, and used it on you.
Hermione opened her mouth, perhaps to tell Ron exactly how to use the
Curse of the Bogies, but Harry hissed at her to be quiet and beckoned them all
forward.
They flitted along corridors striped with bars of moonlight from the high
windows. At every turn Harry expected to run into Filch or Mrs. Norris, but they
were lucky. They sped up a staircase to the third floor and tiptoed toward the
trophy room.
Malfoy and Crabbe werent there yet. The crystal trophy cases
glimmered where the moonlight caught them. Cups, shields, plates, and statues
winked silver and gold in the darkness. They edged along the walls, keeping
their eyes on the doors at either end of the room. Harry took out his wand in case
Malfoy leapt in and started at once. The minutes crept by.
Hes late, maybe hes chickened out, Ron whispered.
Then a noise in the next room made them jump. Harry had only just
raised his wand when they heard someone speak  and it wasnt Malfoy.
Sniff around, my sweet, they might be lurking in a corner.
It was Filch speaking to Mrs. Norris. Horror-struck, Harry waved madly
at the other three to follow him as quickly as possible; they scurried silently
toward the door, away from Filchs voice. Nevilles robes had barely whipped
round the corner when they heard Filch enter the trophy room.
Theyre in here somewhere, they heard him mutter, probably hiding.
This way! Harry mouthed to the others and, petrified, they began to
creep down a long gallery full of suits of armor. They could hear Filch getting
nearer. Neville suddenly let out a frightened squeak and broke into a run he
tripped, grabbed Ron around the waist, and the pair of them toppled right into a
suit of armor.
The clanging and crashing were enough to wake the whole castle.
RUN! Harry yelled, and the four of them sprinted down the gallery, not
looking back to see whether Filch was following  they swung around the
doorpost and galloped down one corridor then another, Harry in the lead, without
any idea where they were or where they were going  they ripped through a
tapestry and found themselves in a hidden passageway, hurtled along it and came
out near their Charms classroom, which they knew was miles from the trophy
room.
I think weve lost him, Harry panted, leaning against the cold wall and
wiping his forehead. Neville was bent double, wheezing and spluttering.
I  told  you, Hermione gasped, clutching at the stitch in her chest,
I  told  you.
Weve got to get back to Gryffindor tower, said Ron, quickly as
possible.
Malfoy tricked you, Hermione said to Harry. You realize that, dont
you? He was never going to meet you  Filch knew someone was going to be in
the trophy room, Malfoy must have tipped him off.
Harry thought she was probably right, but he wasnt going to tell her that.
Lets go.
It wasnt going to be that simple. They hadnt gone more than a dozen
paces when a doorknob rattled and something came shooting out of a classroom
in front of them.
It was Peeves. He caught sight of them and gave a squeal of delight.
Shut up, Peeves  please  youll get us thrown out.
Peeves cackled.
Wandering around at midnight, Ickle Firsties? Tut, tut, tut. Naughty,
naughty, youll get caughty.
Not if you dont give us away, Peeves, please.
Should tell Filch, I should, said Peeves in a saintly voice, but his eyes
glittered wickedly. Its for your own good, you know.
Get out of the way, snapped Ron, taking a swipe at Peeves this was a
big mistake.
STUDENTS OUT OF BED! Peeves bellowed, STUDENTS OUT OF
BED DOWN THE CHARMS CORRIDOR!
Ducking under Peeves, they ran for their lives, right to the end of the
corridor where they slammed into a door  and it was locked.
This is it! Ron moaned, as they pushed helplessly at the door, Were
done for! This is the end!
They could hear footsteps, Filch running as fast as he could toward
Peevess shouts.
Oh, move over, Hermione snarled. She grabbed Harrys wand, tapped
the lock, and whispered, Alohomora!
The lock clicked and the door swung open  they piled through it, shut
it quickly, and pressed their ears against it, listening.
Which way did they go, Peeves? Filch was saying. Quick, tell me.
Say please.
Dont mess with me, Peeves, now where did they go?
Shant say nothing if you dont say please, said Peeves in his annoying
singsong voice.
All right  please.
NOTHING! Ha haaa! Told you I wouldnt say nothing if you didnt say
please! Ha ha! Haaaaaa! And they heard the sound of Peeves whooshing away
and Filch cursing in rage.
He thinks this door is locked, Harry whispered. I think well be okay
 get off, Neville! For Neville had been tugging on the sleeve of Harrys
bathrobe for the last minute. What?
Harry turned around  and saw, quite clearly, what. For a moment, he
was sure hed walked into a nightmare  this was too much, on top of
everything that had happened so far.
They werent in a room, as he had supposed. They were in a corridor.
The forbidden corridor on the third floor. And now they knew why it was
forbidden.
They were looking straight into the eyes of a monstrous dog, a dog that
filled the whole space between ceiling and floor. It had three heads. Three pairs
of rolling, mad eyes; three noses, twitching and quivering in their direction; three
drooling mouths, saliva hanging in slippery ropes from yellowish fangs.
It was standing quite still, all six eyes staring at them, and Harry knew
that the only reason they werent already dead was that their sudden appearance
had taken it by surprise, but it was quickly getting over that, there was no
mistaking what those thunderous growls meant.
Harry groped for the doorknob  between Filch and death, hed take
Filch.
They fell backward  Harry slammed the door shut, and they ran, they
almost flew, back down the corridor. Filch must have hurried off to look for
them somewhere else, because they didnt see him anywhere, but they hardly
cared  all they wanted to do was put as much space as possible between them
and that monster. They didnt stop running until they reached the portrait of the
Fat Lady on the seventh floor.
Where on earth have you all been? she asked, looking at their
bathrobes hanging off their shoulders and their flushed, sweaty faces.
Never mind that  pig snout, pig snout, panted Harry, and the portrait
swung forward. They scrambled into the common room and collapsed,
trembling, into armchairs.
It was a while before any of them said anything. Neville, indeed, looked
as if hed never speak again.
What do they think theyre doing, keeping a thing like that locked up in
a school? said Ron finally. If any dog needs exercise, that one does.
Hermione had got both her breath and her bad temper back again. You
dont use your eyes, any of you, do you? she snapped. Didnt you see what it
was standing on.
The floor? Harry suggested. I wasnt looking at its feet, I was too
busy with its heads.
No, not the floor. It was standing on a trapdoor. Its obviously guarding
something.
She stood up, glaring at them.
I hope youre pleased with yourselves. We could all have been killed 
or worse, expelled. Now, if you dont mind, Im going to bed.
Ron stared after her, his mouth open.
No, we dont mind, he said. Youd think we dragged her along,
wouldnt you.
But Hermione had given Harry something else to think about as he
climbed back into bed. The dog was guarding somethingWhat had Hagrid
said? Gringotts was the safest place in the world for something you wanted to
hide  except perhaps Hogwarts.
It looked as though Harry had found out where the grubby little package
from vault seven hundred and thirteen was.
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER TEN
HALLOWEEN
M alfoy couldnt believe his eyes when he saw that Harry and Ron were still
at Hogwarts the next day, looking tired but perfectly cheerful. Indeed, by the
next morning Harry and Ron thought that meeting the three-headed dog had
been an excellent adventure, and they were quite keen to have another one. In
the meantime, Harry filled Ron in about the package that seemed to have been
moved from Gringotts to Hogwarts, and they spent a lot of time wondering what
could possibly need such heavy protection.
Its either really valuable or really dangerous, said Ron.
Or both, said Harry.
But as all they knew for sure about the mysterious object was that it was
about two inches long, they didnt have much chance of guessing what it was
without further clues.
Neither Neville nor Hermione showed the slightest interest in what lay
underneath the dog and the trapdoor. All Neville cared about was never going
near the dog again.
Hermione was now refusing to speak to Harry and Ron, but she was such
a bossy know-it-all that they saw this as an added bonus. All they really wanted
now was a way of getting back at Malfoy, and to their great delight, just such a
thing arrived in the mail about a week later.
As the owls flooded into the Great Hall as usual, everyones attention
was caught at once by a long, thin package carried by six large screech owls.
Harry was just as interested as everyone else to see what was in this large parcel,
and was amazed when the owls soared down and dropped it right in front of him,
knocking his bacon to the floor. They had hardly fluttered out of the way when
another owl dropped a letter on top of the parcel.
Harry ripped open the letter first, which was lucky, because it said:
DO NOT OPEN THE PARCEL AT THE TABLE.
It contains your new Nimbus Two Thousand, but I dont want
everybody knowing youve got a broomstick or theyll all want one. Oliver
Wood will meet you tonight on the Quidditch field at seven oclock for your first
training session.
Professor McGonagall
Harry had difficulty hiding his glee as he handed the note to Ron to read.
A Nimbus Two Thousand! Ron moaned enviously. Ive never even
touched one.
They left the hall quickly, wanting to unwrap the broomstick in private
before their first class, but halfway across the entrance hall they found the way
upstairs barred by Crabbe and Goyle. Malfoy seized the package from Harry and
felt it.
Thats a broomstick, he said, throwing it back to Harry with a mixture
of jealousy and spite on his face. Youll be in for it this time, Potter, first years
arent allowed them.
Ron couldnt resist it.
Its not any old broomstick, he said, its a Nimbus Two Thousand.
What did you say youve got at home, Malfoy, a Comet Two Sixty? Ron
grinned at Harry. Comets look flashy, but theyre not in the same league as the
Nimbus.
What would you know about it, Weasley, you couldnt afford half the
handle, Malfoy snapped back. I suppose you and your brothers have to save up
twig by twig.
Before Ron could answer, Professor Flitwick appeared at Malfoys
elbow.
Not arguing, I hope, boys? he squeaked.
Potters been sent a broomstick, Professor, said Malfoy quickly.
Yes, yes, thats right, said Professor Flitwick, beaming at Harry.
Professor McGonagall told me all about the special circumstances, Potter. And
what model is it?
A Nimbus Two Thousand, it is, said Harry, fighting not to laugh at the
look of horror on Malfoys face. And its really thanks to Malfoy here that Ive
got it, he added.
Harry and Ron headed upstairs, smothering their laughter at Malfoys
obvious rage and confusion.
Well, its true, Harry chortled as they reached the top of the marble
staircase, If he hadnt stolen Nevilles Remembrall I wouldnt be on the team.

So I suppose you think thats a reward for breaking rules? came an
angry voice from just behind them. Hermione was stomping up the stairs,
looking disapprovingly at the package in Harrys hand.
I thought you werent speaking to us? said Harry.
Yes, dont stop now, said Ron, its doing us so much good.
Hermione marched away with her nose in the air.
Harry had a lot of trouble keeping his mind on his lessons that day. It
kept wandering up to the dormitory where his new broomstick was lying under
his bed, or straying off to the Quidditch field where hed be learning to play that
night. He bolted his dinner that evening without noticing what he was eating,
and then rushed upstairs with Ron to unwrap the Nimbus Two Thousand at last.
Wow, Ron sighed, as the broomstick rolled onto Harrys bedspread.
Even Harry, who knew nothing about the different brooms, thought it
looked wonderful. Sleek and shiny, with a mahogany handle, it had a long tail of
neat, straight twigs and Nimbus Two Thousand written in gold near the top.
As seven oclock drew nearer, Harry left the castle and set off in the dusk
toward the Quidditch field. Held never been inside the stadium before. Hundreds
of seats were raised in stands around the field so that the spectators were high
enough to see what was going on. At either end of the field were three golden
poles with hoops on the end. They reminded Harry of the little plastic sticks
Muggle children blew bubbles through, except that they were fifty feet high.
Too eager to fly again to wait for Wood, Harry mounted his broomstick
and kicked off from the ground. What a feeling  he swooped in and out of the
goal posts and then sped up and down the field. The Nimbus Two Thousand
turned wherever he wanted at his lightest touch.
Hey, Potter, come down!
Oliver Wood had arrived. He was carrying a large wooden crate under his
arm. Harry landed next to him.
Very nice, said Wood, his eyes glinting. I see what McGonagall
meantyou really are a natural. Im just going to teach you the rules this
evening, then youll be joining team practice three times a week.
He opened the crate. Inside were four different-sized balls.
Right, said Wood. Now, Quidditch is easy enough to understand, even
if its not too easy to play. There are seven players on each side. Three of them
are called Chasers.
Three Chasers, Harry repeated, as Wood took out a bright red ball
about the size of a soccer ball.
This balls called the Quaffle, said Wood. The Chasers throw the
Quaffle to each other and try and get it through one of the hoops to score a goal.
Ten points every time the Quaffle goes through one of the hoops. Follow me?
The Chasers throw the Quaffle and put it through the hoops to score,
Harry recited. So  thats sort of like basketball on broomsticks with six
hoops, isnt it?
Whats basketball? said Wood curiously.
Never mind, said Harry quickly.
Now, theres another player on each side whos called the Keeper  Im
Keeper for Gryffindor. I have to fly around our hoops and stop the other team
from scoring.
Three Chasers, one Keeper, said Harry, who was determined to
remember it all. And they play with the Quaffle. Okay, got that. So what are
they for? He pointed at the three balls left inside the box.
Ill show you now, said Wood. Take this.
He handed Harry a small club, a bit like a short baseball bat.
Im going to show you what the Bludgers do, Wood said. These two
are the Bludgers.
He showed Harry two identical balls, jet black and slightly smaller than
the red Quaffle. Harry noticed that they seemed to be straining to escape the
straps holding them inside the box.
Stand back, Wood warned Harry. He bent down and freed one of the
Bludgers.
At once, the black ball rose high in the air and then pelted straight at
Harrys face. Harry swung at it with the bat to stop it from breaking his nose, and
sent it zigzagging away into the air  it zoomed around their heads and then
shot at Wood, who dived on top of it and managed to pin it to the ground.
See? Wood panted, forcing the struggling Bludger back into the crate
and strapping it down safely. The Bludgers rocket around, trying to knock
players off their brooms. Thats why you have two Beaters on each team  the
Weasley twins are ours  its their job to protect their side from the Bludgers
and try and knock them toward the other team. So  think youve got all that?
Three Chasers try and score with the Quaffle; the Keeper guards the
goal posts; the Beaters keep the Bludgers away from their team, Harry reeled
off.
Very good, said Wood.
Er  have the Bludgers ever killed anyone? Harry asked, hoping he
sounded offhand.
Never at Hogwarts. Weve had a couple of broken jaws but nothing
worse than that. Now, the last member of the team is the Seeker. Thats you. And
you dont have to worry about the Quaffle or the Bludgers 
 unless they crack my head open.
Dont worry, the Weasleys are more than a match for the Bludgers  I
mean, theyre like a pair of human Bludgers themselves.
Wood reached into the crate and took out the fourth and last ball.
Compared with the Quaffle and the Bludgers, it was tiny, about the size of a
large walnut. It was bright gold and had little fluttering silver wings.
This, said Wood, is the Golden Snitch, and its the most important ball
of the lot. Its very hard to catch because its so fast and difficult to see. Its the
Seekers job to catch it. Youve got to weave in and out of the Chasers, Beaters,
Bludgers, and Quaffle to get it before the other teams Seeker, because
whichever Seeker catches the Snitch wins his team an extra hundred and fifty
points, so they nearly always win. Thats why Seekers get fouled so much. A
game of Quidditch only ends when the Snitch is caught, so it can go on for ages
 I think the record is three months, they had to keep bringing on substitutes so
the players could get some sleep.
Well, thats it any questions?
Harry shook his head. He understood what he had to do all right, it was
doing it that was going to be the problem.
We wont practice with the Snitch yet, said Wood, carefully shutting it
back inside the crate, its too dark, we might lose it. Lets try you out with a few
of these.
He pulled a bag of ordinary golf balls out of his pocket and a few
minutes later, he and Harry were up in the air, Wood throwing the golf balls as
hard as he could in every direction for Harry to catch.
Harry didnt miss a single one, and Wood was delighted. After half an
hour, night had really fallen and they couldnt carry on.
That Quidditch Cupll have our name on it this year, said Wood
happily as they trudged back up to the castle. I wouldnt be surprised if you turn
out better than Charlie Weasley, and he could have played for England if he
hadnt gone off chasing dragons.
Perhaps it was because he was now so busy, what with Quidditch practice
three evenings a week on top of all his homework, but Harry could hardly
believe it when he realized that hed already been at Hogwarts two months. The
castle felt more like home than Privet Drive ever had. His lessons, too, were
becoming more and more interesting now that they had mastered the basics.
On Halloween morning they woke to the delicious smell of baking
pumpkin wafting through the corridors. Even better, Professor Flitwick
announced in Charms that he thought they were ready to start making objects fly,
something they had all been dying to try since theyd seen him make Nevilles
toad zoom around the classroom. Professor Flitwick put the class into pairs to
practice. Harrys partner was Seamus Finnigan (which was a relief, because
Neville had been trying to catch his eye). Ron, however, was to be working with
Hermione Granger. It was hard to tell whether Ron or Hermione was angrier
about this. She hadnt spoken to either of them since the day Harrys broomstick
had arrived.
Now, dont forget that nice wrist movement weve been practicing!
squeaked Professor Flitwick, perched on top of his pile of books as usual.
Swish and flick, remember, swish and flick. And saying the magic words
properly is very important, too  never forget Wizard Baruffio, who said s
instead of f and found himself on the floor with a buffalo on his chest.
It was very difficult. Harry and Seamus swished and flicked, but the
feather they were supposed to be sending skyward just lay on the desktop.
Seamus got so impatient that he prodded it with his wand and set fire to it 
Harry had to put it out with his hat.
Ron, at the next table, wasnt having much more luck.
Wingardium Leviosa! he shouted, waving his long arms like a
windmill.
Youre saying it wrong, Harry heard Hermione snap. Its Wing-gardium
Levi-o-sa, make the gar nice and long.
You do it, then, if youre so clever, Ron snarled.
Hermione rolled up the sleeves of her gown, flicked her wand, and said,
Wingardium Leviosa!
Their feather rose off the desk and hovered about four feet above their
heads.
Oh, well done! cried Professor Flitwick, clapping. Everyone see here,
Miss Grangers done it!
Ron was in a very bad mood by the end of the class.
Its no wonder no one can stand her, he said to Harry as they pushed
their way into the crowded corridor, shes a nightmare, honestly.
Someone knocked into Harry as they hurried past him. It was Hermione.
Harry caught a glimpse of her face  and was startled to see that she was in
tears.
I think she heard you.
So? said Ron, but he looked a bit uncomfortable. She mustve noticed
shes got no friends.
Hermione didnt turn up for the next class and wasnt seen all afternoon.
On their way down to the Great Hall for the Halloween feast, Harry and Ron
overheard Parvati Patil telling her friend Lavender that Hermione was crying in
the girls bathroom and wanted to be left alone. Ron looked still more awkward
at this, but a moment later they had entered the Great Hall, where the Halloween
decorations put Hermione out of their minds.
A thousand live bats fluttered from the walls and ceiling while a thousand
more swooped over the tables in low black clouds, making the candles in the
pumpkins stutter. The feast appeared suddenly on the golden plates, as it had at
the start-of-term banquet.
Harry was just helping himself to a baked potato when Professor Quirrell
came sprinting into the hall, his turban askew and terror on his face. Everyone
stared as he reached Professor Dumbledores chair, slumped against the table,
and gasped, Troll  in the dungeons  thought you ought to know.
He then sank to the floor in a dead faint.
There was an uproar. It took several purple firecrackers exploding from
the end of Professor Dumbledores wand to bring silence.
Prefects, he rumbled, lead your Houses back to the dormitories
immediately!
Percy was in his element.
Follow me! Stick together, first years! No need to fear the troll if you
follow my orders! Stay close behind me, now. Make way, first years coming
through! Excuse me, Im a prefect!
How could a troll get in? Harry asked as they climbed the stairs.
Dont ask me, theyre supposed to be really stupid, said Ron. Maybe
Peeves let it in for a Halloween joke.
They passed different groups of people hurrying in different directions.
As they jostled their way through a crowd of confused Hufflepuffs, Harry
suddenly grabbed Rons arm.
Ive just thought  Hermione.
What about her?
She doesnt know about the troll.
Ron bit his lip.
Oh, all right, he snapped. But Percyd better not see us.
Ducking down, they joined the Hufflepuffs going the other way, slipped
down a deserted side corridor, and hurried off toward the girls bathroom. They
had just turned the corner when they heard quick footsteps behind them.
Percy! hissed Ron, pulling Harry behind a large stone griffin.
Peering around it, however, they saw not Percy but Snape. He crossed the
corridor and disappeared from view.
Whats he doing? Harry whispered. Why isnt he down in the
dungeons with the rest of the teachers?
Search me.
Quietly as possible, they crept along the next corridor after Snapes
fading footsteps.
Hes heading for the third floor, Harry said, but Ron held up his hand.
Can you smell something?
Harry sniffed and a foul stench reached his nostrils, a mixture of old
socks and the kind of public toilet no one seems to clean.
And then they heard it  a low grunting, and the shuffling footfalls of
gigantic feet. Ron pointed  at the end of a passage to the left, something huge
was moving toward them. They shrank into the shadows and watched as it
emerged into a patch of moonlight.
It was a horrible sight. Twelve feet tall, its skin was a dull, granite gray,
its great lumpy body like a boulder with its small bald head perched on top like a
coconut. It had short legs thick as tree trunks with flat, horny feet. The smell
coming from it was incredible. It was holding a huge wooden club, which
dragged along the floor because its arms were so long.
The troll stopped next to a doorway and peered inside. It waggled its long
ears, making up its tiny mind, then slouched slowly into the room.
The keys in the lock, Harry muttered. We could lock it in.
Good idea, said Ron nervously.
They edged toward the open door, mouths dry, praying the troll wasnt
about to come out of it. With one great leap, Harry managed to grab the key,
slam the door, and lock it.
Yes!
Flushed with their victory, they started to run back up the passage, but as
they reached the corner they heard something that made their hearts stop  a
high, petrified scream  and it was coming from the chamber theyd just
chained up.
Oh, no, said Ron, pale as the Bloody Baron.
Its the girls bathroom! Harry gasped.
Hermione! they said together.
It was the last thing they wanted to do, but what choice did they have?
Wheeling around, they sprinted back to the door and turned the key, fumbling in
their panic. Harry pulled the door open and they ran inside.
Hermione Granger was shrinking against the wall opposite, looking as if
she was about to faint. The troll was advancing on her, knocking the sinks off the
walls as it went.
Confuse it! Harry said desperately to Ron, and, seizing a tap, he threw
it as hard as he could against the wall.
The troll stopped a few feet from Hermione. It lumbered around, blinking
stupidly, to see what had made the noise. Its mean little eyes saw Harry. It
hesitated, then made for him instead, lifting its club as it went.
Oy, pea-brain! yelled Ron from the other side of the chamber, and he
threw a metal pipe at it. The troll didnt even seem to notice the pipe hitting its
shoulder, but it heard the yell and paused again, turning its ugly snout toward
Ron instead, giving Harry time to run around it.
Come on, run, run! Harry yelled at Hermione, trying to pull her toward
the door, but she couldnt move, she was still flat against the wall, her mouth
open with terror.
The shouting and the echoes seemed to be driving the troll berserk. It
roared again and started toward Ron, who was nearest and had no way to escape.
Harry then did something that was both very brave and very stupid: He
took a great running jump and managed to fasten his arms around the trolls neck
from behind. The troll couldnt feel Harry hanging there, but even a troll will
notice if you stick a long bit of wood up its nose, and Harrys wand had still been
in his hand when hed jumped  it had gone straight up one of the trolls nostrils.
Howling with pain, the troll twisted and flailed its club, with Harry
clinging on for dear life; any second, the troll was going to rip him off or catch
him a terrible blow with the club.
Hermione had sunk to the floor in fright; Ron pulled out his own wand
 not knowing what he was going to do he heard himself cry the first spell that
came into his head: Wingardium Leviosa!
The club flew suddenly out of the trolls hand, rose high, high up into the
air, turned slowly over  and dropped, with a sickening crack, onto its owners
head. The troll swayed on the spot and then fell flat on its face, with a thud that
made the whole room tremble.
Harry got to his feet. He was shaking and out of breath. Ron was
standing there with his wand still raised, staring at what he had done.
It was Hermione who spoke first.
Is it  dead?
I dont think so, said Harry, I think its just been knocked out.
He bent down and pulled his wand out of the trolls nose. It was covered
in what looked like lumpy gray glue.
Urgh  troll boogers.
He wiped it on the trolls trousers.
A sudden slamming and loud footsteps made the three of them look up.
They hadnt realized what a racket they had been making, but of course,
someone downstairs must have heard the crashes and the trolls roars. A moment
later, Professor McGonagall had come bursting into the room, closely followed
by Snape, with Quirrell bringing up the rear. Quirrell took one look at the troll,
let out a faint whimper, and sat quickly down on a toilet, clutching his heart.
Snape bent over the troll. Professor McGonagall was looking at Ron and
Harry. Harry had never seen her look so angry. Her lips were white. Hopes of
winning fifty points for Gryffindor faded quickly from Harrys mind.
What on earth were you thinking of? said Professor McGonagall, with
cold fury in her voice. Harry looked at Ron, who was still standing with his
wand in the air. Youre lucky you werent killed. Why arent you in your
dormitory?
Snape gave Harry a swift, piercing look. Harry looked at the floor. He
wished Ron would put his wand down.
Then a small voice came out of the shadows.
Please, Professor McGonagall  they were looking for me.
Miss Granger!
Hermione had managed to get to her feet at last.
I went looking for the troll because I  I thought I could deal with it on
my own  you know, because Ive read all about them.
Ron dropped his wand. Hermione Granger, telling a downright lie to a
teacher?
If they hadnt found me, Id be dead now. Harry stuck his wand up its
nose and Ron knocked it out with its own club. They didnt have time to come
and fetch anyone. It was about to finish me off when they arrived.
Harry and Ron tried to look as though this story wasnt new to them.
Well  in that case ... said Professor McGonagall, staring at the three
of them, Miss Granger, you foolish girl, how could you think of tackling a
mountain troll on your own?
Hermione hung her head. Harry was speechless. Hermione was the last
person to do anything against the rules, and here she was, pretending she had, to
get them out of trouble. It was as if Snape had started handing out sweets.
Miss Granger, five points will be taken from Gryffindor for this, said
Professor McGonagall. Im very disappointed in you. If youre not hurt at all,
youd better get off to Gryffindor tower. Students are finishing the feast in their
houses.
Hermione left.
Professor McGonagall turned to Harry and Ron.
Well, I still say you were lucky, but not many first years could have
taken on a full-grown mountain troll. You each win Gryffindor five points.
Professor Dumbledore will be informed of this. You may go.
They hurried out of the chamber and didnt speak at all until they had
climbed two floors up. It was a relief to be away from the smell of the troll, quite
apart from anything else.
We should have gotten more than ten points, Ron grumbled.
Five, you mean, once shes taken off Hermiones.
Good of her to get us out of trouble like that, Ron admitted. Mind
you, we did save her.
She might not have needed saving if we hadnt locked the thing in with
her, Harry reminded him.
They had reached the portrait of the Fat Lady.
Pig snout, they said and entered.
The common room was packed and noisy. Everyone was eating the food
that had been sent up. Hermione, however, stood alone by the door, waiting for
them. There was a very embarrassed pause. Then, none of them looking at each
other, they all said Thanks, and hurried off to get plates.
But from that moment on, Hermione Granger became their friend. There
are some things you cant share without ending up liking each other, and
knocking out a twelve-foot mountain troll is one of them.
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER ELEVEN
QUIDDITCH
A s they entered November, the weather turned very cold. The mountains
around the school became icy gray and the lake like chilled steel. Every morning
the ground was covered in frost. Hagrid could be seen from the upstairs windows
defrosting broomsticks on the Quidditch field, bundled up in a long moleskin
overcoat, rabbit fur gloves, and enormous beaverskin boots.
The Quidditch season had begun. On Saturday, Harry would be playing
in his first match after weeks of training: Gryffindor versus Slytherin. If
Gryffindor won, they would move up into second place in the house
championship.
Hardly anyone had seen Harry play because Wood had decided that, as
their secret weapon, Harry should be kept, well, secret. But the news that he was
playing Seeker had leaked out somehow, and Harry didnt know which was
worse  people telling him hed be brilliant or people telling him theyd be
running around underneath him holding a mattress.
It was really lucky that Harry now had Hermione as a friend. He didnt
know how hed have gotten through all his homework without her, what with all
the last-minute Quidditch practice Wood was making them do. She had also lent
him Quidditch Through the Ages, which turned out to be a very interesting read.
Harry learned that there were seven hundred ways of committing a
Quidditch foul and that all of them had happened during a World Cup match in
1473; that Seekers were usually the smallest and fastest players, and that most
serious Quidditch accidents seemed to happen to them; that although people
rarely died playing Quidditch, referees had been known to vanish and turn up
months later in the Sahara Desert.
Hermione had become a bit more relaxed about breaking rules since
Harry and Ron had saved her from the mountain troll, and she was much nicer
for it. The day before Harrys first Quidditch match the three of them were out in
the freezing courtyard during break, and she had conjured them up a bright blue
fire that could be carried around in a jam jar. They were standing with their
backs to it, getting warm, when Snape crossed the yard. Harry noticed at once
that Snape was limping. Harry, Ron, and Hermione moved closer together to
block the fire from view; they were sure it wouldnt be allowed. Unfortunately,
something about their guilty faces caught Snapes eye. He limped over. He
hadnt seen the fire, but he seemed to be looking for a reason to tell them off
anyway.
Whats that youve got there, Potter?
It was Quidditch Through the Ages. Harry showed him.
Library books are not to be taken outside the school, said Snape. Give
it to me. Five points from Gryffindor.
Hes just made that rule up, Harry muttered angrily as Snape limped
away. Wonder whats wrong with his leg?
Dunno, but I hope its really hurting him, said Ron bitterly.
The Gryffindor common room was very noisy that evening. Harry, Ron, and
Hermione sat together next to a window. Hermione was checking Harry and
Rons Charms homework for them. She would never let them copy (How will
you learn?), but by asking her to read it through, they got the right answers
anyway.
Harry felt restless. He wanted Quidditch Through the Ages back, to take
his mind off his nerves about tomorrow. Why should he be afraid of Snape?
Getting up, he told Ron and Hermione he was going to ask Snape if he could
have it.
Better you than me, they said together, but Harry had an idea that
Snape wouldnt refuse if there were other teachers listening.
He made his way down to the staffroom and knocked. There was no
answer. He knocked again. Nothing.
Perhaps Snape had left the book in there? It was worth a try. He pushed
the door ajar and peered inside  and a horrible scene met his eyes.
Snape and Filch were inside, alone. Snape was holding his robes above
his knees. One of his legs was bloody and mangled. Filch was handing Snape
bandages.
Blasted thing, Snape was saying. How are you supposed to keep your
eyes on all three heads at once?
Harry tried to shut the door quietly, but 
POTTER!
Snapes face was twisted with fury as he dropped his robes quickly to
hide his leg. Harry gulped.
I just wondered if I could have my book back.
GET OUT! OUT!
Harry left, before Snape could take any more points from Gryffindor. He
sprinted back upstairs.
Did you get it? Ron asked as Harry joined them. Whats the matter?
In a low whisper, Harry told them what hed seen.
You know what this means? he finished breathlessly. He tried to get
past that three-headed dog at Halloween! Thats where he was going when we
saw him  hes after whatever its guarding! And Id bet my broomstick he let
that troll in, to make a diversion!
Hermiones eyes were wide.
No  he wouldnt, she said. I know hes not very nice, but he
wouldnt try and steal something Dumbledore was keeping safe.
Honestly, Hermione, you think all teachers are saints or something,
snapped Ron. Im with Harry. I wouldnt put anything past Snape. But whats
he after? Whats that dog guarding?
Harry went to bed with his head buzzing with the same question. Neville
was snoring loudly, but Harry couldnt sleep. He tried to empty his mind  he
needed to sleep, he had to, he had his first Quidditch match in a few hours  but
the expression on Snapes face when Harry had seen his leg wasnt easy to
forget.
The next morning dawned very bright and cold. The Great Hall was full of
the delicious smell of fried sausages and the cheerful chatter of everyone looking
forward to a good Quidditch match.
Youve got to eat some breakfast.
I dont want anything.
Just a bit of toast, wheedled Hermione.
Im not hungry.
Harry felt terrible. In an hours time hed be walking onto the field.
Harry, you need your strength, said Seamus Finnigan. Seekers are
always the ones who get clobbered by the other team.
Thanks, Seamus, said Harry, watching Seamus pile ketchup on his
sausages.
By eleven oclock the whole school seemed to be out in the stands around
the Quidditch pitch. Many students had binoculars. The seats might be raised
high in the air, but it was still difficult to see what was going on sometimes.
Ron and Hermione joined Neville, Seamus, and Dean the West Ham fan
up in the top row. As a surprise for Harry, they had painted a large banner on one
of the sheets Scabbers had ruined. It said Potter for President, and Dean, who
was good at drawing, had done a large Gryffindor lion underneath. Then
Hermione had performed a tricky little charm so that the paint flashed different
colors.
Meanwhile, in the locker room, Harry and the rest of the team were
changing into their scarlet Quidditch robes (Slytherin would be playing in
green).
Wood cleared his throat for silence.
Okay, men, he said.
And women, said Chaser Angelina Johnson.
And women, Wood agreed. This is it.
The big one, said Fred Weasley.
The one weve all been waiting for, said George.
We know Olivers speech by heart, Fred told Harry, we were on the
team last year.
Shut up, you two, said Wood. This is the best team Gryffindors had
in years. Were going to win. I know it.
He glared at them all as if to say, Or else.
Right. Its time. Good luck, all of you.
Harry followed Fred and George out of the locker room and, hoping his
knees werent going to give way, walked onto the field to loud cheers.
Madam Hooch was refereeing. She stood in the middle of the field
waiting for the two teams, her broom in her hand.
Now, I want a nice fair game, all of you, she said, once they were all
gathered around her. Harry noticed that she seemed to be speaking particularly to
the Slytherin Captain, Marcus Flint, a sixth year. Harry thought Flint looked as if
he had some troll blood in him. Out of the corner of his eye he saw the fluttering
banner high above, flashing Potter for President over the crowd. His heart
skipped. He felt braver.
Mount your brooms, please.
Harry clambered onto his Nimbus Two Thousand.
Madam Hooch gave a loud blast on her silver whistle.
Fifteen brooms rose up, high, high into the air. They were off.
And the Quaffle is taken immediately by Angelina Johnson of
Gryffindor  what an excellent Chaser that girl is, and rather attractive, too 
JORDAN!
Sorry, Professor.
The Weasley twins friend, Lee Jordan, was doing the commentary for
the match, closely watched by Professor McGonagall.
And shes really belting along up there, a neat pass to Alicia Spinnet, a
good find of Oliver Woods, last year only a reserve  back to Johnson and 
no, the Slytherins have taken the Quaffle, Slytherin Captain Marcus Flint gains
the Quaffle and off he goes  Flint flying like an eagle up there  hes going to
sc no, stopped by an excellent move by Gryffindor Keeper Wood and the
Gryffindors take the Quaffle  thats Chaser Katie Bell of Gryffindor there, nice
dive around Flint, off up the field and  OUCH  that must have hurt, hit in
the back of the head by a Bludger  Quaffle taken by the Slytherins  thats
Adrian Pucey speeding off toward the goal posts, but hes blocked by a second
Bludger  sent his way by Fred or George Weasley, cant tell which  nice
play by the Gryffindor Beater, anyway, and Johnson back in possession of the
Quaffle, a clear field ahead and off she goes  shes really flying  dodges a
speeding Bludger  the goal posts are ahead  come on, now, Angelina 
Keeper Bletchley dives  misses  GRYFFINDORS SCORE!
Gryffindor cheers filled the cold air, with howls and moans from the
Slytherins.
Budge up there, move along.
Hagrid!
Ron and Hermione squeezed together to give Hagrid enough space to
join them.
Bin watchin from me hut, said Hagrid, patting a large pair of
binoculars around his neck, But it isnt the same as bein in the crowd. No sign
of the Snitch yet, eh?
Nope, said Ron. Harry hasnt had much to do yet.
Kept outta trouble, though, thats somethin, said Hagrid, raising his
binoculars and peering skyward at the speck that was Harry.
Way up above them, Harry was gliding over the game, squinting about
for some sign of the Snitch. This was part of his and Woods game plan.
Keep out of the way until you catch sight of the Snitch, Wood had said.
We dont want you attacked before you have to be.
When Angelina had scored, Harry had done a couple of loop-the-loops to
let off his feelings. Now he was back to staring around for the Snitch. Once he
caught sight of a flash of gold, but it was just a reflection from one of the
Weasleys wristwatches, and once a Bludger decided to come pelting his way,
more like a cannonball than anything, but Harry dodged it and Fred Weasley
came chasing after it.
All right there, Harry? he had time to yell, as he beat the Bludger
furiously toward Marcus Flint.
Slytherin in possession, Lee Jordan was saying, Chaser Pucey ducks
two Bludgers, two Weasleys, and Chaser Bell, and speeds toward the  wait a
moment  was that the Snitch?
A murmur ran through the crowd as Adrian Pucey dropped the Quaffle,
too busy looking over his shoulder at the flash of gold that had passed his left
ear.
Harry saw it. In a great rush of excitement he dived downward after the
streak of gold. Slytherin Seeker Terence Higgs had seen it, too. Neck and neck
they hurtled toward the Snitch  all the Chasers seemed to have forgotten what
they were supposed to be doing as they hung in midair to watch.
Harry was faster than Higgs  he could see the little round ball, wings
fluttering, darting up ahead  he put on an extra spurt of speed 
WHAM! A roar of rage echoed from the Gryffindors below  Marcus
Flint had blocked Harry on purpose, and Harrys broom spun off course, Harry
holding on for dear life.
Foul! screamed the Gryffindors.
Madam Hooch spoke angrily to Flint and then ordered a free shot at the
goal posts for Gryffindor. But in all the confusion, of course, the Golden Snitch
had disappeared from sight again.
Down in the stands, Dean Thomas was yelling, Send him off, ref! Red
card!
What are you talking about, Dean? said Ron.
Red card! said Dean furiously. In soccer you get shown the red card
and youre out of the game!
But this isnt soccer, Dean, Ron reminded him.
Hagrid, however, was on Deans side.
They oughta change the rules. Flint coulda knocked Harry outta the air.
Lee Jordan was finding it difficult not to take sides.
So  after that obvious and disgusting bit of cheating 
Jordan! growled Professor McGonagall.
I mean, after that open and revolting foul
Jordan, Im warning you 
All right, all right. Flint nearly kills the Gryffindor Seeker, which could
happen to anyone, Im sure, so a penalty to Gryffindor, taken by Spinner, who
puts it away, no trouble, and we continue play, Gryffindor still in possession.
It was as Harry dodged another Bludger, which went spinning
dangerously past his head, that it happened. His broom gave a sudden,
frightening lurch. For a split second, he thought he was going to fall. He gripped
the broom tightly with both his hands and knees. Hed never felt anything like
that.
It happened again. It was as though the broom was trying to buck him
off. But Nimbus Two Thousands did not suddenly decide to buck their riders off.
Harry tried to turn back toward the Gryffindor goal-posts  he had half a mind
to ask Wood to call time-out  and then he realized that his broom was
completely out of his control. He couldnt turn it. He couldnt direct it at all. It
was zigzagging through the air, and every now and then making violent swishing
movements that almost unseated him.
Lee was still commentating.
Slytherin in possession  Flint with the Quaffle  passes Spinnet 
passes Bell  hit hard in the face by a Bludger, hope it broke his nose  only
joking, Professor  Slytherins score  A no
The Slytherins were cheering. No one seemed to have noticed that
Harrys broom was behaving strangely. It was carrying him slowly higher, away
from the game, jerking and twitching as it went.
Dunno what Harry thinks hes doing, Hagrid mumbled. He stared
through his binoculars. If I didn know better, Id say hed lost control of his
broombut he cant have.
Suddenly, people were pointing up at Harry all over the stands. His
broom had started to roll over and over, with him only just managing to hold on.
Then the whole crowd gasped. Harrys broom had given a wild jerk and Harry
swung off it. He was now dangling from it, holding on with only one hand.
Did something happen to it when Flint blocked him? Seamus
whispered.
Cant have, Hagrid said, his voice shaking. Cant nothing interfere
with a broomstick except powerful Dark magic  no kid could do that to a
Nimbus Two Thousand.
At these words, Hermione seized Hagrids binoculars, but instead of
looking up at Harry, she started looking frantically at the crowd.
What are you doing? moaned Ron, gray-faced.
I knew it, Hermione gasped, Snape  look.
Ron grabbed the binoculars. Snape was in the middle of the stands
opposite them. He had his eyes fixed on Harry and was muttering nonstop under
his breath.
Hes doing something  jinxing the broom, said Hermione.
What should we do?
Leave it to me.
Before Ron could say another word, Hermione had disappeared. Ron
turned the binoculars back on Harry. His broom was vibrating so hard, it was
almost impossible for him to hang on much longer. The whole crowd was on its
feet, watching, terrified, as the Weasleys flew up to try and pull Harry safely
onto one of their brooms, but it was no good  every time they got near him, the
broom would jump higher still. They dropped lower and circled beneath him,
obviously hoping to catch him if he fell. Marcus Flint seized the Quaffle and
scored five times without anyone noticing.
Come on, Hermione, Ron muttered desperately.
Hermione had fought her way across to the stand where Snape stood, and
was now racing along the row behind him; she didnt even stop to say sorry as
she knocked Professor Quirrell headfirst into the row in front. Reaching Snape,
she crouched down, pulled out her wand, and whispered a few, well-chosen
words. Bright blue flames shot from her wand onto the hem of Snapes robes.
It took perhaps thirty seconds for Snape to realize that he was on fire. A
sudden yelp told her she had done her job. Scooping the fire off him into a little
jar in her pocket, she scrambled back along the row  Snape would never know
what had happened.
It was enough. Up in the air, Harry was suddenly able to clamber back on
to his broom.
Neville, you can look! Ron said. Neville had been sobbing into
Hagrids jacket for the last five minutes.
Harry was speeding toward the ground when the crowd saw him clap his
hand to his mouth as though he was about to be sick  he hit the field on all
fours  coughed  and something gold fell into his hand.
Ive got the Snitch! he shouted, waving it above his head, and the game
ended in complete confusion.
He didnt catch it, he nearly swallowed it, Flint was still howling
twenty minutes later, but it made no difference  Harry hadnt broken any rules
and Lee Jordan was still happily shouting the results  Gryffindor had won by
one hundred and seventy points to sixty. Harry heard none of this, though. He
was being made a cup of strong tea back in Hagrids hut, with Ron and
Hermione.
It was Snape, Ron was explaining, Hermione and I saw him. He was
cursing your broomstick, muttering, he wouldnt take his eyes off you.
Rubbish, said Hagrid, who hadnt heard a word of what had gone on
next to him in the stands. Why would Snape do somethin like that?
Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another, wondering what to tell
him. Harry decided on the truth.
I found out something about him, he told Hagrid. He tried to get past
that three-headed dog on Halloween. It bit him. We think he was trying to steal
whatever its guarding.
Hagrid dropped the teapot.
How do you know about Fluffy? he said.
Fluffy?
Yeah  hes mine  bought him off a Greek chappie I met in the pub
las year  I lent him to Dumbledore to guard the 
Yes? said Harry eagerly.
Now, dont ask me anymore, said Hagrid gruffly. Thats top secret,
that is.
But Snapes trying to steal it.
Rubbish, said Hagrid again. Snapes a Hogwarts teacher, hed do
nothin of the sort.
So why did he just try and kill Harry? cried Hermione.
The afternoons events certainly seemed to have changed her mind about
Snape.
I know a jinx when I see one, Hagrid, Ive read all about them! Youve
got to keep eye contact, and Snape wasnt blinking at all, I saw him!
Im tellin yeh, yer wrong! said Hagrid hotly. I don know why
Harrys broom acted like that, but Snape wouldn try an kill a student! Now,
listen to me, all three of yeh  yer meddlin in things that don concern yeh. Its
dangerous. You forget that dog, an you forget what its guardin, thats between
Professor Dumbledore an Nicolas Flamel 
Aha! said Harry, so theres someone called Nicolas Flamel involved,
is there?
Hagrid looked furious with himself.
HP 1 - Harry Potter and the
Sorcerer's Stone
CHAPTER TWELVE
THE MIRROR OF ERISED
C hristmas was coming. One morning in mid-December, Hogwarts woke to
find itself covered in several feet of snow. The lake froze solid and the Weasley
twins were punished for bewitching several snowballs so that they followed
Quirrell around, bouncing off the back of his turban. The few owls that managed
to battle their way through the stormy sky to deliver mail had to be nursed back
to health by Hagrid before they could fly off again.
No one could wait for the holidays to start. While the Gryffindor
common room and the Great Hall had roaring fires, the drafty corridors had
become icy and a bitter wind rattled the windows in the classrooms. Worst of all
were Professor Snapes classes down in the dungeons, where their breath rose in
a mist before them and they kept as close as possible to their hot cauldrons.
I do feel so sorry, said Draco Malfoy, one Potions class, for all those
people who have to stay at Hogwarts for Christmas because theyre not wanted
at home.
He was looking over at Harry as he spoke. Crabbe and Goyle chuckled.
Harry, who was measuring out powdered spine of lionfish, ignored them. Malfoy
had been even more unpleasant than usual since the Quidditch match. Disgusted
that the Slytherins had lost, he had tried to get everyone laughing at how a widemouthed
tree frog would be replacing Harry as Seeker next. Then hed realized
that nobody found this funny, because they were all so impressed at the way
Harry had managed to stay on his bucking broomstick. So Malfoy, jealous and
angry, had gone back to taunting Harry about having no proper family.
It was true that Harry wasnt going back to Privet Drive for Christmas.
Professor McGonagall had come around the week before, making a list of
students who would be staying for the holidays, and Harry had signed up at
once. He didnt feel sorry for himself at all; this would probably be the best
Christmas hed ever had. Ron and his brothers were staying, too, because Mr.
and Mrs. Weasley were going to Romania to visit Charlie.
When they left the dungeons at the end of Potions, they found a large fir
tree blocking the corridor ahead. Two enormous feet sticking out at the bottom
and a loud puffing sound told them that Hagrid was behind it.
Hi, Hagrid, want any help? Ron asked, sticking his head through the
branches.
Nah, Im all right, thanks, Ron.
Would you mind moving out of the way? came Malfoys cold drawl
from behind them. Are you trying to earn some extra money, Weasley? Hoping
to be gamekeeper yourself when you leave Hogwarts, I suppose  that hut of
Hagrids must seem like a palace compared to what your familys used to.
Ron dived at Malfoy just as Snape came up the stairs.
WEASLEY!
Ron let go of the front of Malfoys robes.
He was provoked, Professor Snape, said Hagrid, sticking his huge
hairy face out from behind the tree. Malfoy was insultin his family.
Be that as it may, fighting is against Hogwarts rules, Hagrid, said
Snape silkily. Five points from Gryffindor, Weasley, and be grateful it isnt
more. Move along, all of you.
Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle pushed roughly past the tree, scattering
needles everywhere and smirking.
Ill get him, said Ron, grinding his teeth at Malfoys back, one of
these days, Ill get him 
I hate them both, said Harry, Malfoy and Snape.
Come on, cheer up, its nearly Christmas, said Hagrid. Tell yeh what,
come with me an see the Great Hall, looks a treat.
So the three of them followed Hagrid and his tree off to the Great Hall,
where Professor McGonagall and Professor Flitwick were busy with the
Christmas decorations.
Ah, Hagrid, the last tree  put it in the far corner, would you?
The hall looked spectacular. Festoons of holly and mistletoe hung all
around the walls, and no less than twelve towering Christmas trees stood around
the room, some sparkling with tiny icicles, some glittering with hundreds of
candles.
How many days you got left until yer holidays? Hagrid asked.
Just one, said Hermione. And that reminds me  Harry, Ron, weve
got half an hour before lunch, we should be in the library.
Oh yeah, youre right, said Ron, tearing his eyes away from Professor
Flitwick, who had golden bubbles blossoming out of his wand and was trailing
them over the branches of the new tree.
The library? said Hagrid, following them out of the hall. Just before
the holidays? Bit keen, arent yeh?
Oh, were not working, Harry told him brightly. Ever since you
mentioned Nicolas Flamel weve been trying to find out who he is.
You what? Hagrid looked shocked. Listen here  Ive told yeh 
drop it. Its nothin to you what that dogs guardin.
We just want to know who Nicolas Flamel is, thats all, said Hermione.
Unless youd like to tell us and save us the trouble? Harry added. We
mustve been through hundreds of books already and we cant find him
anywhere  just give us a hint  I know Ive read his name somewhere.
Im sayin nothin, said Hagrid flatly.
Just have to find out for ourselves, then, said Ron, and they left Hagrid
looking disgruntled and hurried off to the library.
They had indeed been searching books for Flamels name ever since
Hagrid had let it slip, because how else were they going to find out what Snape
was trying to steal? The trouble was, it was very hard to know where to begin,
not knowing what Flamel might have done to get himself into a book. He wasnt
in Great Wizards of the Twentieth Century, or Notable Magical Names of Our
Time; he was missing, too, from Important Modern Magical Discoveries, and A
Study of Recent Developments in Wizardry. And then, of course, there was the
sheer size of the library; tens of thousands of books; thousands of shelves;
hundreds of narrow rows.
Hermione took out a list of subjects and titles she had decided to search
while Ron strode off down a row of books and started pulling them off the
shelves at random. Harry wandered over to the Restricted Section. He had been
wondering for a while if Flamel wasnt somewhere in there. Unfortunately, you
needed a specially signed note from one of the teachers to look in any of the
restricted books, and he knew hed never get one. These were the books
containing powerful Dark Magic never taught at Hogwarts, and only read by
older students studying advanced Defense Against the Dark Arts.
What are you looking for, boy?
Nothing, said Harry.
Madam Pince the librarian brandished a feather duster at him.
Youd better get out, then. Go on  out!
Wishing hed been a bit quicker at thinking up some story, Harry left the
library. He, Ron, and Hermione had already agreed theyd better not ask Madam
Pince where they could find Flamel. They were sure shed be able to tell them,
but they couldnt risk Snape hearing what they were up to.
Harry waited outside in the corridor to see if the other two had found
anything, but he wasnt very hopeful. They had been looking for two weeks,
after A, but as they only had odd moments between lessons it wasnt surprising
theyd found nothing. What they really needed was a nice long search without
Madam Pince breathing down their necks.
Five minutes later, Ron and Hermione joined him, shaking their heads.
They went off to lunch.
You will keep looking while Im away, wont you? said Hermione.
And send me an owl if you find anything.
And you could ask your parents if they know who Flamel is, said Ron.
Itd be safe to ask them.
Very safe, as theyre both dentists, said Hermione.
Once the holidays had started, Ron and Harry were having too good a time to
think much about Flamel. They had the dormitory to themselves and the
common room was far emptier than usual, so they were able to get the good
armchairs by the fire. They sat by the hour eating anything they could spear on a
toasting fork  bread, English muffins, marshmallows  and plotting ways of
getting Malfoy expelled, which were fun to talk about even if they wouldnt
work.
Ron also started teaching Harry wizard chess. This was exactly like
Muggle chess except that the figures were alive, which made it a lot like
directing troops in battle. Rons set was very old and battered. Like everything
else he owned, it had once belonged to someone else in his family  in this
case, his grandfather. However, old chessmen werent a drawback at all. Ron
knew them so well he never had trouble getting them to do what he wanted.
Harry played with chessmen Seamus Finnigan had lent him, and they
didnt trust him at all. He wasnt a very good player yet and they kept shouting
different bits of advice at him, which was confusing. Dont send me there, cant
you see his knight? Send him, we can afford to lose him.
On Christmas Eve, Harry went to bed looking forward to the next day for
the food and the fun, but not expecting any presents at all. When he woke early
in the morning, however, the first thing he saw was a small pile of packages at
the foot of his bed.
Merry Christmas, said Ron sleepily as Harry scrambled out of bed and
pulled on his bathrobe.
You, too, said Harry. Will you look at this? Ive got some presents!
What did you expect, turnips? said Ron, turning to his own pile, which
was a lot bigger than Harrys.
Harry picked up the top parcel. It was wrapped in thick brown paper and
scrawled across it was To Harry, from Hagrid. Inside was a roughly cut wooden
flute. Hagrid had obviously whittled it himself. Harry blew it  it sounded a bit
like an owl.
A second, very small parcel contained a note.
We received your message and enclose your Christmas present. From
Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia. Taped to the note was a fifty-pence piece.
Thats friendly, said Harry.
Ron was fascinated by the fifty pence.
Weird! he said, What a shape! This is money?
You can keep it, said Harry, laughing at how pleased Ron was. Hagrid
and my aunt and uncle  so who sent these?
I think I know who that ones from, said Ron, turning a bit pink and
pointing to a very lumpy parcel. My mom. I told her you didnt expect any
presents and  oh, no, he groaned, shes made you a Weasley sweater.
Harry had torn open the parcel to find a thick, hand-knitted sweater in
emerald green and a large box of homemade fudge.
Every year she makes us a sweater, said Ron, unwrapping his own,
and mines always maroon.
Thats really nice of her, said Harry, trying the fudge, which was very
tasty.
His next present also contained candy  a large box of Chocolate Frogs
from Hermione.
This only left one parcel. Harry picked it up and felt it. It was very light.
He unwrapped it.
Something fluid and silvery gray went slithering to the floor where it lay
in gleaming folds. Ron gasped.
Ive heard of those, he said in a hushed voice, dropping the box of
Every Flavor Beans hed gotten from Hermione. If thats what I think it is 
theyre really rare, and really valuable.
What is it?
Harry picked the shining, silvery cloth off the floor. It was strange to the
touch, like water woven into material.
Its an invisibility cloak, said Ron, a look of awe on his face. Im sure
it is  try it on.
Harry threw the cloak around his shoulders and Ron gave a yell.
It is! Look down!
Harry looked down at his feet, but they were gone. He dashed to the
mirror. Sure enough, his reflection looked back at him, just his head suspended
in midair, his body completely invisible. He pulled the cloak over his head and
his reflection vanished completely.
Theres a note! said Ron suddenly. A note fell out of it!
Harry pulled off the cloak and seized the letter. Written in narrow, loopy
writing he had never seen before were the following words:
Your father left this in my possession before he died.
It is time it was returned to you.
Use it well.
A Very Merry Christmas to you.
There was no signature. Harry stared at the note. Ron was admiring the
cloak.
Id give anything for one of these, he said. Anything. Whats the
matter?
Nothing, said Harry. He felt very strange. Who had sent the cloak? Had
it really once belonged to his father?
Before he could say or think anything else, the dormitory door was flung
open and Fred and George Weasley bounded in. Harry stuffed the cloak quickly
out of sight. He didnt feel like sharing it with anyone else yet.
Merry Christmas!
Hey, look  Harrys got a Weasley sweater, too!
Fred and George were wearing blue sweaters, one with a large yellow F
on it, the other a G.
Harrys is better than ours, though, said Fred, holding up Harrys
sweater. She obviously makes more of an effort if youre not family.
Why arent you wearing yours, Ron? George demanded. Come on,
get it on, theyre lovely and warm.
I hate maroon, Ron moaned halfheartedly as he pulled it over his head.
You havent got a letter on yours, George observed. I suppose she
thinks you dont forget your name. But were not stupid  we know were
called Gred and Forge.
Whats all this noise?
Percy Weasley stuck his head through the door, looking disapproving. He
had clearly gotten halfway through unwrapping his presents as he, too, carried a
lumpy sweater over his arm, which Fred seized.
P for prefect! Get it on, Percy, come on, were all wearing ours, even
Harry got one.
I  dont  want  said Percy thickly, as the twins forced the
sweater over his head, knocking his glasses askew.
And youre not sitting with the prefects today, either, said George.
Christmas is a time for family.
They frog-marched Percy from the room, his arms pinned to his side by
his sweater.
Harry had never in all his life had such a Christmas dinner. A hundred fat,
roast turkeys; mountains of roast and boiled potatoes; platters of chipolatas;
tureens of buttered peas, silver boats of thick, rich gravy and cranberry sauce 
and stacks of wizard crackers every few feet along the table. These fantastic
party favors were nothing like the feeble Muggle ones the Dursleys usually
bought, with their little plastic toys and their flimsy paper hats inside. Harry
pulled a wizard cracker with Fred and it didnt just bang, it went off with a blast
like a cannon and engulfed them all in a cloud of blue smoke, while from the
inside exploded a rear admirals hat and several live, white mice. Up at the High
Table, Dumbledore had swapped his pointed wizards hat for a flowered bonnet,
and was chuckling merrily at a joke Professor Flitwick had just read him.
Flaming Christmas puddings followed the turkey. Percy nearly broke his
teeth on a silver sickle embedded in his slice. Harry watched Hagrid getting
redder and redder in the face as he called for more wine, finally kissing
Professor McGonagall on the cheek, who, to Harrys amazement, giggled and
blushed, her top hat lopsided.
When Harry finally left the table, he was laden down with a stack of
things out of the crackers, including a pack of nonexplodable, luminous
balloons, a Grow-Your-Own-Warts kit, and his own new wizard chess set. The
white mice had disappeared and Harry had a nasty feeling they were going to
end up as Mrs. Norriss Christmas dinner.
Harry and the Weasleys spent a happy afternoon having a furious
snowball fight on the grounds. Then, cold, wet, and gasping for breath, they
returned to the fire in the Gryffindor common room, where Harry broke in his
new chess set by losing spectacularly to Ron. He suspected he wouldnt have
lost so badly if Percy hadnt tried to help him so much.
After a meal of turkey sandwiches, crumpets, trifle, and Christmas cake,
everyone felt too full and sleepy to do much before bed except sit and watch
Percy chase Fred and George all over Gryffindor tower because theyd stolen his
prefect badge.
It had been Harrys best Christmas day ever. Yet something had been
nagging at the back of his mind all day. Not until he climbed into bed was he
free to think about it: the invisibility cloak and whoever had sent it.
Ron, full of turkey and cake and with nothing mysterious to bother him,
fell asleep almost as soon as hed drawn the curtains of his four-poster. Harry
leaned over the side of his own bed and pulled the cloak out from under it.
His fathersthis had been his fathers. He let the material flow over his
hands, smoother than silk, light as air. Use it well, the note had said.
He had to try it, now. He slipped out of bed and wrapped the cloak
around himself. Looking down at his legs, he saw only moonlight and shadows.
It was a very funny feeling.
Use it well.
Suddenly, Harry felt wide-awake. The whole of Hogwarts was open to
him in this cloak. Excitement flooded through him as he stood there in the dark
and silence. He could go anywhere in this, anywhere, and Filch would never
know.
Ron grunted in his sleep. Should Harry wake him? Something held him
back  his fathers cloak  he felt that this time  the first time  he wanted
to use it alone.
He crept out of the dormitory, down the stairs, across the common room,
and climbed through the portrait hole.
Whos there? squawked the Fat Lady. Harry said nothing. He walked
quickly down the corridor.
Where should he go? He stopped, his heart racing, and thought. And then
it came to him. The Restricted Section in the library. Hed be able to read as long
as he liked, as long as it took to find out who Flamel was. He set off, drawing the
invisibility cloak tight around him as he walked.
The library was pitch-black and very eerie. Harry lit a lamp to see his
way along the rows of books. The lamp looked as if it was floating along in
midair, and even though Harry could feel his arm supporting it, the sight gave
him the creeps.
The Restricted Section was right at the back of the library. Stepping
carefully over the rope that separated these books from the rest of the library, he
held up his lamp to read the titles.
They didnt tell him much. Their peeling, faded gold letters spelled
words in languages Harry couldnt understand. Some had no title at all. One
book had a dark stain on it that looked horribly like blood. The hairs on the back
of Harrys neck prickled. Maybe he was imagining it, maybe not, but he thought
a faint whispering was coming from the books, as though they knew someone
was there who shouldnt be.
He had to start somewhere. Setting the lamp down carefully on the floor,
he looked along the bottom shelf for an interesting looking book. A large black
and silver volume caught his eye. He pulled it out with difficulty, because it was
very heavy, and, balancing it on his knee, let it fall open.
A piercing, bloodcurdling shriek split the silence  the book was
screaming! Harry snapped it shut, but the shriek went on and on, one high,
unbroken, earsplitting note. He stumbled backward and knocked over his lamp,
which went out at once. Panicking, he heard footsteps coming down the corridor
outside  stuffing the shrieking book back on the shelf, he ran for it. He passed
Filch in the doorway; Filchs pale, wild eyes looked straight through him, and
Harry slipped under Filchs outstretched arm and streaked off up the corridor, the
books shrieks still ringing in his ears.
He came to a sudden halt in front of a tall suit of armor. He had been so
busy getting away from the library, he hadnt paid attention to where he was
going. Perhaps because it was dark, he didnt recognize where he was at all.
There was a suit of armor near the kitchens, he knew, but he must be five floors
above there.
You asked me to come directly to you, Professor, if anyone was
wandering around at night, and somebodys been in the library Restricted
Section.
Harry felt the blood drain out of his face. Wherever he was, Filch must
know a shortcut, because his soft, greasy voice was getting nearer, and to his
horror, it was Snape who replied, The Restricted Section? Well, they cant be
far, well catch them.
Harry stood rooted to the spot as Filch and Snape came around the corner
ahead. They couldnt see him, of course, but it was a narrow corridor and if they
came much nearer theyd knock right into him  the cloak didnt stop him from
being solid.
He backed away as quietly as he could. A door stood ajar to his left. It
was his only hope. He squeezed through it, holding his breath, trying not to
move it, and to his relief he managed to get inside the room without their
noticing anything. They walked straight past, and Harry leaned against the wall,
breathing deeply, listening to their footsteps dying away. That had been close,
very close. It was a few seconds before he noticed anything about the room he
had hidden in.
It looked like an unused classroom. The dark shapes of desks and chairs
were piled against the walls, and there was an upturned wastepaper basket  but
propped against the wall facing him was something that didnt look as if it
belonged there, something that looked as if someone had just put it there to keep
it out of the way.
It was a magnificent mirror, as high as the ceiling, with an ornate gold
frame, standing on two clawed feet. There was an inscription carved around the
top: Erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru oyt on wohsi. His panic fading now that there
was no sound of Filch and Snape, Harry moved nearer to the mirror, wanting to
look at himself but see no reflection again. He stepped in front of it.
He had to clap his hands to his mouth to stop himself from screaming. He
whirled around. His heart was pounding far more furiously than when the book
had screamed  for he had seen not only himself in the mirror, but a whole
crowd of people standing right behind him.
But the room was empty. Breathing very fast, he turned slowly back to
the mirror.
There he was, reflected in it, white and scared-looking, and there,
reflected behind him, were at least ten others. Harry looked over his shoulder 
but still, no one was there. Or were they all invisible, too? Was he in fact in a
room full of invisible people and this mirrors trick was that it reflected them,
invisible or not?
He looked in the mirror again. A woman standing right behind his
reflection was smiling at him and waving. He reached out a hand and felt the air
behind him. If she was really there, hed touch her, their reflections were so
close together, but he felt only air  she and the others existed only in the mirror.
She was a very pretty woman. She had dark red hair and her eyes  her
eyes are just like mine, Harry thought, edging a little closer to the glass. Bright
green  exactly the same shape, but then he noticed that she was crying;
smiling, but crying at the same time. The tall, thin, black-haired man standing
next to her put his arm around her. He wore glasses, and his hair was very
untidy. It stuck up at the back, just as Harrys did.
Harry was so close to the mirror now that his nose was nearly touching
that of his reflection.
Mom? he whispered. Dad?
They just looked at him, smiling. And slowly, Harry looked into the faces
of the other people in the mirror, and saw other pairs of green eyes like his, other
noses like his, even a little old man who looked as though he had Harrys
knobbly knees  Harry was looking at his family, for the first time in his life.
The Potters smiled and waved at Harry and he stared hungrily back at
them, his hands pressed flat against the glass as though he was hoping to fall
right through it and reach them. He had a powerful kind of ache inside him, half
joy, half terrible sadness.
How long he stood there, he didnt know. The reflections did not fade
and he looked and looked until a distant noise brought him back to his senses.
He couldnt stay here, he had to find his way back to bed. He tore his eyes away
from his mothers face, whispered, Ill come back, and hurried from the room.
You could have woken me up, said Ron, crossly.
You can come tonight, Im going back, I want to show you the mirror.
Id like to see your mom and dad, Ron said eagerly.
And I want to see all your family, all the Weasleys, youll be able to
show me your other brothers and everyone.
You can see them any old time, said Ron. Just come round my house
this summer. Anyway, maybe it only shows dead people. Shame about not
finding Flamel, though. Have some bacon or something, why arent you eating
anything?
Harry couldnt eat. He had seen his parents and would be seeing them
again tonight. He had almost forgotten about Flamel. It didnt seem very
important anymore. Who cared what the three headed dog was guarding? What
did it matter if Snape stole it, really?
Are you all right? said Ron. You look odd.
What Harry feared most was that he might not be able to find the mirror
room again. With Ron covered in the cloak, too, they had to walk much more
slowly the next night. They tried retracing Harrys route from the library,
wandering around the dark passageways for nearly an hour.
Im freezing, said Ron. Lets forget it and go back.
No! Harry hissed. I know its here somewhere.
They passed the ghost of a tall witch gliding in the opposite direction, but
saw no one else. just as Ron started moaning that his feet were dead with cold,
Harry spotted the suit of armor.
Its here  just here  yes!
They pushed the door open. Harry dropped the cloak from around his
shoulders and ran to the mirror.
There they were. His mother and father beamed at the sight of him.
See? Harry whispered.
I cant see anything.
Look! Look at them allthere are loads of them.
I can only see you.
Look in it properly, go on, stand where I am.
Harry stepped aside, but with Ron in front of the mirror, he couldnt see
his family anymore, just Ron in his paisley pajamas.
Ron, though, was staring transfixed at his image.
Look at me! he said.
Can you see all your family standing around you?
No  Im alone  but Im different  I look older  and Im head
boy!
What?
I am  Im wearing the badge like Bill used to  and Im holding the
house cup and the Quidditch cup  Im Quidditch captain, too.
Ron tore his eyes away from this splendid sight to look excitedly at
Harry.
Do you think this mirror shows the future?
How can it? All my family are dead  let me have another look 
You had it to yourself all last night, give me a bit more time.
Youre only holding the Quidditch cup, whats interesting about that? I
want to see my parents.
Dont push me 
A sudden noise outside in the corridor put an end to their discussion.
They hadnt realized how loudly they had been talking.
Quick!
Ron threw the cloak back over them as the luminous eyes of Mrs. Norris
came round the door. Ron and Harry stood quite still, both thinking the same
thing  did the cloak work on cats? After what seemed an age, she turned and
left.
This isnt safe  she might have gone for Filch, I bet she heard us.
Come on.
And Ron pulled Harry out of the room.
The snow still hadnt melted the next morning.
Want to play chess, Harry? said Ron.
No.
Why dont we go down and visit Hagrid?
Noyou go
I know what youre thinking about, Harry, that mirror. Dont go back
tonight.
Why not?
I dunno, Ive just got a bad feeling about it  and anyway, youve had
too many close shaves already. Filch, Snape, and Mrs. Norris are wandering
around. So what if they cant see you? What if they walk into you? What if you
knock something over?
You sound like Hermione.
Im serious, Harry, dont go.
But Harry only had one thought in his head, which was to get back in
front of the mirror, and Ron wasnt going to stop him.
That third night he found his way more quickly than before. He was walking
so fast he knew he was making more noise than was wise, but he didnt meet
anyone.
And there were his mother and father smiling at him again, and one of
his grandfathers nodding happily. Harry sank down to sit on the floor in front of
the mirror. There was nothing to stop him from staying here all night with his
family. Nothing at all.
Except 
So  back again, Harry?
Harry felt as though his insides had turned to ice. He looked behind him.
Sitting on one of the desks by the wall was none other than Albus Dumbledore.
Harry must have walked straight past him, so desperate to get to the mirror he
hadnt noticed him.
I  I didnt see you, sir.
Strange how nearsighted being invisible can make you, said
Dumbledore, and Harry was relieved to see that he was smiling.
So, said Dumbledore, slipping off the