Lee, HarperTo Kill a Mockingbird
1960
TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD
by Harper Lee
DEDICATION
for Mr. Lee and Alice
in consideration of Love & Affection
Lawyers, I suppose, were children once.
Charles Lamb
PART ONE
1
When he was nearly thirteen, my brother Jem got his arm badly
broken at the elbow. When it healed, and Jems fears of never being
able to play football were assuaged, he was seldom self-conscious about
his injury. His left arm was somewhat shorter than his right; when he
stood or walked, the back of his hand was at right angles to his body,
his thumb parallel to his thigh. He couldnt have cared less, so long as
he could pass and punt.
When enough years had gone by to enable us to look back on them,
we sometimes discussed the events leading to his accident. I maintain
that the Ewells started it all, but Jem, who was four years my senior,
said it started long before that. He said it began the summer Dill came
to us, when Dill first gave us the idea of making Boo Radley come out.
I said if he wantedto take a broad view of the thing, it really began
with Andrew Jackson. If General Jackson hadnt run the Creeks up the
creek, Simon Finch would never have paddled up the Alabama, and
where would we be if he hadnt? We were far too old to settle an
argument with a fist-fight, so we consulted Atticus. Our father said we
were both right.
Being Southerners, it was a source of shame to some members of
the family that we had no recorded ancestors on either side of the
Battle of Hastings. All we had was Simon Finch, a fur-trapping
apothecary from Cornwall whose piety was exceeded only by his
stinginess. In England, Simon was irritated by the persecution of those
who called themselves Methodists at the hands of their more liberal
brethren, and as Simon called himself a Methodist, he worked his way
across the Atlantic to Philadelphia, thence to Jamaica, thence to
Mobile, and up the Saint Stephens. Mindful of John Wesleys strictures
on the use of many words in buying and selling, Simon made a pile
practicing medicine, but in this pursuit he was unhappy lest he be
tempted into doing what he knew was not for the glory of God, as the
putting on of gold and costly apparel. So Simon, having forgotten his
teachers dictum on the possession of human chattels, bought three
slaves and with their aid established a homestead on the banks of the
Alabama River some forty miles above Saint Stephens. He returned to
Saint Stephens only once, to find a wife, and with her established a line
that ran high to daughters. Simon lived to animpressive age and died
rich.
It was customary for the men in the family to remain on Simons
homestead, Finchs Landing, and make their living from cotton. The
place was self-sufficient: modest in comparison with the empires
around it, the Landing nevertheless produced everything required to
sustain life except ice, wheat flour, and articles of clothing, supplied by
river-boats from Mobile.
Simon would have regarded with impotent fury the disturbance
between the North and the South, as it left his descendants stripped of
everything but their land, yet the tradition of living on the land
remained unbroken until well into the twentieth century, when my
father, Atticus Finch, went to Montgomery to read law, and his younger
brother went to Boston to study medicine. Their sister Alexandra was
the Finch who remained at the Landing: she married a taciturn man
who spent most of his time lying in a hammock by the river wondering
if his trot-lines were full.
When my father was admitted to the bar, he returned to Maycomb
and began his practice. Maycomb, some twenty miles east of Finchs
Landing, was the county seat of Maycomb County. Atticuss office in
the courthouse contained little more than a hat rack, a spittoon, a
checkerboard and an unsullied Code of Alabama. His first two clients
were the last two persons hanged in the Maycomb County jail. Atticus
had urged them to accept the states generosity in allowing them to
plead Guilty to second-degree murder and escape with their lives, but
they were Haverfords, in Maycomb County a name synonymous with
jackass. The Haverfords had dispatched Maycombs leading blacksmith
in a misunderstanding arising from the alleged wrongful detention of a
mare, were imprudent enough to do it in the presence of three
witnesses, and insisted that the-son-of-a-bitch-had-it-coming-to-him
was a good enough defense for anybody. They persisted in pleading Not
Guilty to first-degree murder, so there was nothing much Atticus could
do for his clients except be present at their departure, an occasion that
was probably the beginning of my fathers profound distaste for the
practice of criminal law.
During his first five years in Maycomb, Atticus practiced economy
more than anything; for several years thereafter he invested his
earnings in his brothers education. John Hale Finch was ten years
younger than my father, and chose to study medicine at a time when
cotton was not worth growing; but after getting Uncle Jack started,
Atticus derived a reasonable income from the law. He liked Maycomb,
he was Maycomb County born and bred; he knew his people, they knew
him, and because of Simon Finchs industry, Atticus was related by
blood or marriage to nearly every family in the town.
Maycomb was an old town, but it was a tired old town when I first
knew it. In rainy weather the streets turned to red slop; grass grew on
the sidewalks, the courthouse sagged in the square. Somehow, it was
hotter then: a black dog suffered on a summers day; bony mules
hitched to Hoover carts flicked flies in the sweltering shade ofthe live
oaks on the square. Mens stiff collars wilted by nine in the morning.
Ladies bathed before noon, after their three-oclock naps, and by
nightfall were like soft teacakes with frostings of sweat and sweet
talcum.
People moved slowly then. They ambled across the square, shuffled
in and out of the stores around it, took their time about everything. A
day was twenty-four hours long but seemed longer. There was no
hurry, for there was nowhere to go, nothing to buy and no money to
buy it with, nothing to see outside the boundaries of Maycomb County.
But it was a time of vague optimism for some of the people: Maycomb
County had recently been told that it had nothing to fear but fear itself.
We lived on the main residential street in townAtticus, Jem and I,
plus Calpurnia our cook. Jem and I found our father satisfactory: he
played with us, read to us, and treated us with courteous detachment.
Calpurnia was something else again. She was all angles and bones;
she was nearsighted; she squinted; her hand waswide as a bed slat and
twice as hard. She was always ordering me out of the kitchen, asking
me why I couldnt behave as well as Jem when she knew he was older,
and calling me home when I wasnt ready to come. Our battles were
epic and one-sided. Calpurnia always won, mainly because Atticus
always took her side. She had been with us ever since Jem was born,
and I had felt her tyrannical presence as long as I could remember.
Our mother died when I was two, so I never felt her absence. She
was a Graham from Montgomery; Atticus met her when he was first
elected to the state legislature. He was middle-aged then, she was
fifteen years his junior. Jem was the product of their first year of
marriage; four years later I was born, and two years later our mother
died from a sudden heart attack. They said it ran in her family. I did
not miss her, but I think Jem did. He remembered her clearly, and
sometimes in the middle of a game he would sigh at length, then go off
and play by himself behind the car-house. When he was like that, I
knew better than to bother him.
When I was almost six and Jem was nearly ten, our summertime
boundaries (within calling distance of Calpurnia) were Mrs. Henry
Lafayette Duboses house two doors to the north of us, and the Radley
Place three doors to the south. We were never tempted to break them.
The Radley Place was inhabited by an unknown entity the mere
description of whom was enough to make us behave for days on end;
Mrs. Dubose was plain hell.
That was the summer Dill came to us.
Early one morning as we were beginning our days play in the back
yard, Jem and I heard something next door in Miss Rachel Haverfords
collard patch. We went to the wire fence to see if there was a puppy
Miss Rachels rat terrier was expectinginstead we found someone
sitting looking at us. Sitting down, he wasnt much higher than the
collards. We stared at him until he spoke:
Hey.
Hey yourself, said Jem pleasantly.
Im Charles Baker Harris, he said. I can read.
So what? I said.
I just thought youd like to know I can read. You got anything
needs readin I can do it....
How old are you, asked Jem, four-and-a-half?
Goin on seven.
Shoot no wonder, then, said Jem, jerking his thumb at me. Scout
yonders been readin ever since she was born, and she aint even
started to school yet. You look right puny for goin on seven.
Im little but Im old, he said.
Jem brushed his hair back to get a better look. Why dont you
come over, Charles Baker Harris? he said. Lord, what a name.
s not any funniern yours. Aunt Rachel says your names Jeremy
Atticus Finch.
Jem scowled. Im big enough to fit mine, he said. Your names
longern you are. Bet its a foot longer.
Folks call me Dill, said Dill, struggling under the fence.
Do better if you go over it instead of under it, I said. Whered you
come from?
Dill was from Meridian, Mississippi, was spending the summer
with his aunt, Miss Rachel, and would be spending every summer in
Maycomb from now on. His family was from Maycomb County
originally, his mother worked for a photographer in Meridian, had
entered his picture in a Beautiful Child contest and won five dollars.
She gave the money to Dill, who went to the picture show twenty times
on it.
Dont have any picture shows here, except Jesus ones in the
courthouse sometimes, said Jem. Ever see anything good?
Dill had seen Dracula, a revelation that moved Jem to eye him with
the beginning of respect. Tell it to us, he said.
Dill was a curiosity. He wore blue linen shorts that buttoned to his
shirt, his hair was snow white and stuck to his head like duckfluff; he
was a year my senior but I towered over him. As he told us the old tale
his blue eyes would lighten and darken; his laugh was sudden and
happy; he habitually pulled at a cowlick in the center of his forehead.
When Dill reduced Dracula to dust, and Jem said the show
sounded better than the book, I asked Dill where his father was: You
aint said anything about him.
I havent got one.
Is he dead?
No...
Then if hes not dead youve got one, havent you?
Dill blushed and Jem told me to hush, a sure sign that Dill had
been studied and found acceptable. Thereafter the summer passed in
routine contentment. Routine contentment was: improving our
treehouse that rested between giant twin chinaberry trees in the back
yard, fussing, running through our list of dramas based on the works of
Oliver Optic, Victor Appleton, and Edgar Rice Burroughs. In this
matter we were lucky to have Dill. He played the character parts
formerly thrust upon methe ape in Tarzan, Mr. Crabtree in The
Rover Boys, Mr. Damon in Tom Swift. Thus we came to know Dill as a
pocket Merlin, whose head teemed with eccentric plans, strange
longings, and quaint fancies.
But by the end of August our repertoire was vapid from countless
reproductions, and it was then that Dill gave us the idea of making Boo
Radley come out.
The Radley Place fascinated Dill. In spite of our warnings and
explanations it drew him as the moon draws water, but drew him no
nearer than the light-pole on the corner, a safe distance from the
Radley gate. There he would stand, his arm around the fat pole, staring
and wondering.
The Radley Place jutted into a sharp curve beyond our house.
Walking south, one faced its porch; the sidewalk turned and ran beside
the lot. The house was low, was once white with a deep front porch and
green shutters, but had long ago darkened to the color of the slate-gray
yard around it. Rain-rotted shingles drooped over the eaves of the
veranda; oak trees kept the sun away. The remains of a picket
drunkenly guarded the front yarda swept yard that was never
swept-where johnson grass and rabbit-tobacco grew in abundance.
Inside the house lived a malevolent phantom. People said he
existed, but Jem and I had never seen him. People said he went out at
night when the moon was down, and peeped in windows. When
peoples azaleas froze in a cold snap, it was because he had breathed on
them. Any stealthy small crimes committed in Maycomb were his work.
Once the town was terrorized by a series of morbid nocturnal events:
peoples chickens and household pets were found mutilated; although
the culprit was Crazy Addie, who eventually drowned himself in
Barkers Eddy, people still looked at the Radley Place, unwilling to
discard their initial suspicions. A Negro would not pass the Radley
Place at night, he would cut across to the sidewalk opposite and whistle
as he walked. The Maycomb school grounds adjoined the back of the
Radley lot; from the Radley chickenyard tall pecan trees shook their
fruit into the schoolyard, but the nuts lay untouched by the children:
Radley pecans would kill you. A baseball hit into the Radley yard was a
lost ball and no questions asked.
The misery of that house began many years before Jem and I were
born. The Radleys, welcome anywhere in town, kept to themselves, a
predilection unforgivable in Maycomb. They did not go to church,
Maycombs principal recreation, but worshiped at home; Mrs. Radley
seldom if ever crossed the street for a mid-morning coffee break with
her neighbors, and certainly never joined a missionary circle. Mr.
Radley walked to town at eleven-thirty every morning and came back
promptly at twelve, sometimes carrying a brown paper bag that the
neighborhood assumed contained the family groceries. I never knew
how old Mr. Radley made his livingJem said he bought cotton, a
polite term for doing nothingbut Mr. Radley and his wife had lived
there with their two sons as long as anybody could remember.
The shutters and doors of the Radley house were closed on
Sundays, another thing alien to Maycombs ways: closed doors meant
illness and cold weather only. Of all days Sunday was the day for
formal afternoon visiting: ladies wore corsets, men wore coats, children
wore shoes. But to climb the Radley front steps and call, He-y, of a
Sunday afternoon was something their neighbors never did. The
Radley house had no screen doors. I once asked Atticus if it ever had
any; Atticus said yes, but before I was born.
According to neighborhood legend, when the younger Radley boy
was in his teens he became acquainted with some of the Cunninghams
from Old Sarum, an enormous and confusing tribe domiciled in the
northern part of the county, and they formed the nearest thing to a
gang ever seen in Maycomb. They did little, but enough to be discussed
by the town and publicly warned from three pulpits: they hung around
the barbershop; they rode the bus to Abbottsville on Sundays and went
to the picture show; they attended dances at the countys riverside
gambling hell, the Dew-Drop Inn &Fishing Camp; they experimented
with stumphole whiskey. Nobody in Maycomb had nerve enough to tell
Mr. Radley that his boy was in with the wrong crowd.
One night, in an excessive spurt of high spirits, the boys backed
around the square in a borrowed flivver, resisted arrest by Maycombs
ancient beadle, Mr. Conner, and locked him in the courthouse
outhouse. The town decided something had to be done; Mr. Conner
said he knew who each and every one of them was, and he was bound
and determined they wouldnt get away with it, so the boys came before
the probate judge on charges of disorderly conduct, disturbing the
peace, assault and battery, and using abusive and profane language in
the presence and hearing of a female. The judge asked Mr. Conner why
he included the last charge; Mr. Conner said they cussed so loud he was
sure every lady in Maycomb heard them. The judge decided to send the
boys to the state industrial school, where boys were sometimes sent for
no other reason than to provide them with food and decent shelter: it
was no prison and it was no disgrace. Mr. Radley thought it was. If the
judge released Arthur, Mr. Radley would see to it that Arthur gave no
further trouble. Knowing that Mr. Radleys word was his bond, the
judge was glad to do so.
The other boys attended the industrial school and received the best
secondary education to be had in the state; one of them eventually
worked his way through engineering school at Auburn. The doors of
the Radley house were closed on weekdays as well as Sundays, and Mr.
Radleys boy was not seen again for fifteen years.
But there came a day, barely within Jems memory, when Boo
Radley was heard from and was seen by several people, but not by Jem.
He said Atticus never talked much about the Radleys: when Jem would
question him Atticuss only answer was for him to mind his own
business and let the Radleys mind theirs, they had a right to; but when
it happened Jem said Atticus shook his head and said, Mm, mm, mm.
So Jem received most of his information from Miss Stephanie
Crawford, a neighborhood scold, who said she knew the whole thing.
According to Miss Stephanie, Boo was sitting in the livingroom cutting
some items from The Maycomb Tribune to paste in his scrapbook. His
father entered the room. As Mr. Radley passed by, Boo drove the
scissors into his parents leg, pulled them out, wiped them on his pants,
and resumed his activities.
Mrs. Radley ran screaming into the street that Arthur was killing
them all, but when the sheriff arrived he found Boo still sitting in the
livingroom, cutting up the Tribune. He was thirty-three years old then.
Miss Stephanie said old Mr. Radley said no Radley was going to any
asylum, when it was suggested that a season in Tuscaloosa might be
helpful to Boo. Boo wasnt crazy, he was high-strung at times. It was all
right to shut him up, Mr. Radley conceded, but insisted that Boo not be
charged with anything: he was not a criminal. The sheriff hadnt the
heart to put him in jail alongside Negroes, so Boo was locked in the
courthouse basement.
Boos transition from the basement to back home was nebulous in
Jems memory. Miss Stephanie Crawford said some of the town council
told Mr. Radley that if he didnt take Boo back, Boo would die of mold
from the damp. Besides, Boo could not live forever on the bounty of the
county.
Nobody knew what form of intimidation Mr. Radley employed to
keep Boo out of sight, but Jem figured that Mr. Radley kept him
chained to the bed most of the time. Atticus said no, it wasnt that sort
of thing, that there were other ways of making people into ghosts.
My memory came alive to see Mrs. Radley occasionally open the
front door, walk to the edge of the porch, and pour water on her
cannas. But every day Jem and I would see Mr. Radley walking to and
from town. He was a thin leathery man with colorless eyes, so colorless
they did not reflect light. His cheekbones were sharp and his mouth
was wide, with a thin upper lip and a full lower lip. Miss Stephanie
Crawford said he was so upright he took the word of God as his only
law, and we believed her, because Mr. Radleys posture was ramrod
straight.
He never spoke to us. When he passed we would look at the ground
and say, Good morning, sir, and he would cough in reply. Mr.
Radleys elder son lived in Pensacola; he came home at Christmas, and
he was one of the few persons we ever saw enter or leave the place.
From the day Mr. Radley took Arthur home, people said the house
died.
But there came a day when Atticus told us hed wear us out if we
made any noise in the yard and commissioned Calpurnia to serve in his
absence if she heard a sound out of us. Mr. Radley was dying.
He took his time about it. Wooden sawhorses blocked the road at
each end of the Radley lot, straw was put down on the sidewalk, traffic
was diverted to the back street. Dr. Reynolds parked his car in front of
our house and walked to the Radleys every time he called. Jem and I
crept around the yard for days. At last the sawhorses were taken away,
and we stood watching from the front porch when Mr. Radley made his
final journey past our house.
There goes the meanest man ever God blew breath into,
murmured Calpurnia, and she spat meditatively into the yard. We
looked at her in surprise, for Calpurnia rarely commented on the ways
of white people.
The neighborhood thought when Mr. Radley went under Boo would
come out, but it had another think coming: Boos elder brother
returned from Pensacola and took Mr. Radleys place. The only
difference between him and his father was their ages. Jem said Mr.
Nathan Radley bought cotton,too. Mr. Nathan would speak to us,
however, when we said good morning, and sometimes we saw him
coming from town with a magazine in his hand.
The more we told Dill about the Radleys, the more he wanted to
know, the longer he would stand huggingthe light-pole on the corner,
the more he would wonder.
Wonder what he does in there, he would murmur. Looks like
hed just stick his head out the door.
Jem said, He goes out, all right, when its pitch dark. Miss
Stephanie Crawford said she woke up in the middle of the night one
time and saw him looking straight through the window at her... said his
head was like a skull lookinat her. Aint you ever waked up at night
and heard him, Dill? He walks like this Jem slid his feet through the
gravel. Why do you think Miss Rachel locks up so tight at night? Ive
seen his tracks in our back yard many a mornin, and one night I heard
him scratching on the back screen, but he was gone time Atticus got
there.
Wonder what he looks like? said Dill.
Jem gave a reasonable description of Boo: Boo was about six-anda-
half feet tall, judging from his tracks; he dined on raw squirrels and
any cats he could catch, thats why his hands were bloodstainedif you
ate an animal raw, you could never wash the blood off. There was a
long jagged scar that ran across his face; what teeth he had were yellow
and rotten; his eyes popped, and he drooled most of the time.
Lets try to make him come out, said Dill. Id like to see what he
looks like.
Jem said if Dill wanted to get himself killed, all he had to do was go
up and knock on the front door.
Our first raid came to pass only because Dill bet Jem The Gray
Ghost against two Tom Swifts that Jem wouldnt get any farther than
the Radley gate. In all his life, Jem had never declined a dare.
Jem thought about it for three days. I suppose he loved honor more
than his head, for Dill wore him down easily: Youre scared, Dill said,
the first day. Aint scared, just respectful, Jem said. The next day Dill
said, Youre too scared even to put your big toe in the front yard. Jem
said he reckoned he wasnt, hed passed the Radley Place every school
day of his life.
Always runnin, I said.
But Dill got him the third day, when he told Jem that folks in
Meridian certainly werent asafraid as the folks in Maycomb, that hed
never seen such scary folks as the ones in Maycomb.
This was enough to make Jem march to the corner, where he
stopped and leaned against the light-pole, watching the gate hanging
crazily on its homemade hinge.
I hope youve got it through your head that hell kill us each and
every one, Dill Harris,said Jem, when we joined him. Dont blame
me when he gouges your eyes out. You started it, remember.
Youre still scared, murmured Dill patiently.
Jem wanted Dillto know once and for all that he wasnt scared of
anything: Its just that I cant think of a way to make him come out
without him gettin us. Besides, Jem had his little sister to think of.
When he said that, I knew he was afraid. Jem had his little sister to
think of the time I dared him to jump off the top of the house: If I got
killed, whatd become of you? he asked. Then he jumped, landed
unhurt, and his sense of responsibility left him until confronted by the
Radley Place.
You gonna run out on a dare? asked Dill. If you are, then
Dill, you have to think about these things, Jem said. Lemme
think a minute... its sort of like making a turtle come out...
Hows that? asked Dill.
Strike a match under him.
I told Jem if he set fire to the Radley house I was going to tell
Atticus on him.
Dill said striking a match under a turtle was hateful.
Aint hateful, just persuades hims not like youd chunk him in
the fire, Jem growled.
How do you know a match dont hurt him?
Turtles cant feel, stupid, said Jem.
Were you ever a turtle, huh?
My stars, Dill! Now lemme think... reckon we can rock him....
Jem stood in thought so long that Dill made a mild concession: I
wont say you ran out on a dare an Ill swap you The Gray Ghost if you
just go up and touch the house.
Jem brightened. Touch the house, that all?
Dill nodded.
Sure thats all, now? I dont want you hollerin something different
the minute I get back.
Yeah, thats all, said Dill. Hell probably come out after you when
he sees you in the yard, then Scoutn mell jump on him and hold him
down till we can tell him we aint gonna hurt him.
We left the corner, crossed the side street that ran in front of the
Radley house, and stopped at the gate.
Well go on, said Dill, Scout and mes right behind you.
Im going, said Jem, dont hurry me.
He walked to the corner of the lot, then back again, studying the
simple terrain as if deciding how best to effect an entry, frowning and
scratching his head.
Then I sneered at him.
Jem threw open the gate and sped to the side of the house, slapped
it with his palm and ran back past us, not waiting to see if his foray was
successful. Dill and I followed on his heels. Safely on our porch,
panting and out of breath, we looked back.
The oldhouse was the same, droopy and sick, but as we stared
down the street we thought we saw an inside shutter move. Flick. A
tiny, almost invisible movement, and the house was still.
2
Dill left us early in September, to return to Meridian. We saw him
off on the five oclock bus and I was miserable without him until it
occurred to me that I would be starting to school in a week. I never
looked forward more to anything in my life. Hours of wintertime had
found me in the treehouse, looking over at the schoolyard, spying on
multitudes of children through a two-power telescope Jem had given
me, learning their games, following Jems red jacket through wriggling
circles of blind mans buff, secretly sharing their misfortunes and
minor victories. I longed to join them.
Jem condescended to take me to school the first day, a job usually
done by ones parents, but Atticus had said Jem would be delighted to
show me where my room was. I think some money changed hands in
this transaction, for as we trotted around the corner past the Radley
Place I heard an unfamiliar jingle in Jems pockets. When we slowed to
a walk at the edge of the schoolyard, Jem was careful to explain that
during school hours I was not to bother him, I was not to approach him
with requests to enact a chapter of Tarzan and the Ant Men, to
embarrass him with references to his private life, or tag along behind
him at recess and noon. I was to stick with the first grade and he would
stick with the fifth. In short, I was to leave him alone.
You mean we cant play any more? I asked.
Well do like we always do at home, he said, but youll seeschools
different.
It certainly was. Before the first morning was over, Miss Caroline
Fisher, our teacher, hauled me up to the front of the room and patted
the palm of my hand with a ruler, then made me stand in the corner
until noon.
Miss Caroline was no more than twenty-one. She had bright
auburn hair, pink cheeks, and wore crimson fingernail polish. She also
wore high-heeled pumps and a red-and-white-striped dress. She
looked and smelled like a peppermint drop. She boarded across the
street one door down from us in Miss Maudie Atkinsons upstairs front
room, and when Miss Maudie introduced us to her, Jem was in a haze
for days.
Miss Caroline printed her name on the blackboard and said, This
says I am Miss Caroline Fisher. I am from North Alabama, from
Winston County. The class murmured apprehensively, should she
prove to harbor her share of the peculiarities indigenous to that region.
(When Alabama seceded from the Union on January 11, 1861, Winston
County seceded from Alabama, and every child in Maycomb County
knew it.) North Alabama was full of Liquor Interests, Big Mules, steel
companies, Republicans, professors, and other persons of no
background.
Miss Caroline began the day by reading us a story about cats. The
cats had long conversations with one another, they wore cunning little
clothes and lived in a warm house beneath a kitchen stove. By the time
Mrs. Cat called the drugstore for an order of chocolate malted mice the
class was wriggling like a bucketful of catawba worms. Miss Caroline
seemed unaware that the ragged, denim-shirted and floursack-skirted
first grade, most of whom had chopped cotton and fed hogs from the
time they were able to walk, were immune to imaginative literature.
Miss Caroline came to the end of the story and said, Oh, my, wasnt
that nice?
Then she went to the blackboard and printed the alphabet in
enormous square capitals, turned to the class and asked, Does
anybody know what these are?
Everybody did; most of the first grade had failed it last year.
I suppose she chose me because she knew my name; as I read the
alphabet a faint line appeared between her eyebrows, and after making
me read most of My First Reader and the stock-market quotations
from The Mobile Register aloud, she discovered that I was literate and
looked at me with more than faint distaste. Miss Caroline told me to
tell my father not to teach me any more, it would interfere with my
reading.
Teach me? I said in surprise. He hasnt taught me anything, Miss
Caroline. Atticus aint got time to teach me anything, I added, when
Miss Caroline smiled and shook her head. Why, hes so tired at night
he just sits in the livingroom and reads.
If he didnt teach you, who did? Miss Caroline asked goodnaturedly.
Somebody did. You werent born reading The Mobile
Register.
Jem says I was. He read in a book where I was a Bullfinch instead
of a Finch. Jem says my names really Jean Louise Bullfinch, that I got
swapped when I was born and Im really a
Miss Caroline apparently thought I was lying. Lets not let our
imaginations run away with us, dear, she said. Now you tell your
father not to teach you any more. Its best to begin reading with a fresh
mind. You tell him Ill take over from here and try to undo the
damage
Maam?
Your father does not know how to teach. You can have a seat now.
I mumbled that I was sorry and retired meditating upon my crime.
I never deliberately learned to read, but somehow I had been wallowing
illicitly in the daily papers. In the long hours of churchwas it then I
learned? I could not remember not being able to read hymns. Now that
I was compelled to think about it, reading was something that just
came to me, as learning to fasten the seat ofmy union suit without
looking around, or achieving two bows from a snarl of shoelaces. I
could not remember when the lines above Atticuss moving finger
separated into words, but I had stared at them all the evenings in my
memory, listening to the news of the day, Bills to Be Enacted into Laws,
the diaries of Lorenzo Dowanything Atticus happened to be reading
when I crawled into his lap every night. Until I feared I would lose it, I
never loved to read. One does not love breathing.
I knew I had annoyed Miss Caroline, so I let well enough alone and
stared out the window until recess when Jem cut me from the covey of
first-graders in the schoolyard. He asked how I was getting along. I told
him.
If I didnt have to stay Id leave. Jem, that damn lady says Atticuss
been teaching me to read and for him to stop it
Dont worry, Scout, Jem comforted me. Our teacher says Miss
Carolines introducing a new way of teaching. She learned about it in
college. Itll be in all the grades soon. You dont have to learn much out
of books that wayits like if you wanta learn about cows, you go milk
one, see?
Yeah Jem, but I dont wanta study cows, I
Sure you do. You hafta know about cows, theyre a big part of life
in Maycomb County.
I contented myself with asking Jem if hed lost his mind.
Im just trying to tell you the new way theyre teachin the first
grade, stubborn. Its the Dewey Decimal System.
Having never questioned Jems pronouncements, I saw no reason
to begin now. The Dewey Decimal System consisted, in part, of Miss
Caroline waving cards at us on which were printed the, cat, rat,
man, and you. No comment seemed to be expected of us, and the
class received these impressionistic revelations in silence. I was bored,
so I began a letter to Dill.Miss Caroline caught me writing and told me
to tell my father to stop teaching me. Besides, she said. We dont
write in the first grade, we print. You wont learn to write until youre in
the third grade.
Calpurnia was to blame for this. It kept me from driving her crazy
on rainy days, I guess. She would set me a writing task by scrawling the
alphabet firmly across the top of a tablet, then copying out a chapter of
the Bible beneath. If I reproduced her penmanship satisfactorily, she
rewarded me with an open-faced sandwich of bread and butter and
sugar. In Calpurnias teaching, there was no sentimentality: I seldom
pleased her and she seldom rewarded me.
Everybody who goes home to lunch hold up your hands, said
Miss Caroline, breaking into my new grudge against Calpurnia.
The town children did so, and she looked us over.
Everybody who brings his lunch put it on top of his desk.
Molasses buckets appeared from nowhere, and the ceiling danced
with metallic light. Miss Caroline walked up and down the rows
peering and poking into lunch containers, nodding if the contents
pleased her, frowning a little at others. She stopped at Walter
Cunninghams desk. Wheres yours? she asked.
Walter Cunninghams face told everybody in the first grade he had
hookworms. His absence of shoes told us how he got them. People
caught hookworms going barefooted in barnyards and hog wallows. If
Walter had owned any shoes he would have worn them the first day of
school and then discarded them until mid-winter. He did have on a
clean shirt and neatly mended overalls.
Did you forget your lunch this morning? asked Miss Caroline.
Walter looked straight ahead. I saw a muscle jump in his skinny
jaw.
Did you forget it this morning? asked Miss Caroline. Walters jaw
twitched again.
Yebm, he finally mumbled.
Miss Caroline went to her desk and opened her purse. Heres a
quarter, she said to Walter. Go and eat downtown today. You can pay
me back tomorrow.
Walter shook his head. Nome thank you maam, he drawled
softly.
Impatience crept into Miss Carolines voice: Here Walter, come
get it.
Walter shook his head again.
When Walter shook his head a third time someone whispered, Go
on and tell her, Scout.
I turned around and saw most of the town people and the entire
bus delegationlooking at me. Miss Caroline and I had conferred twice
already, and they were looking at me in the innocent assurance that
familiarity breeds understanding.
I rose graciously on Walters behalf: AhMiss Caroline?
What is it, Jean Louise?
Miss Caroline, hes a Cunningham.
I sat back down.
What, Jean Louise?
I thought I had made things sufficiently clear. It was clear enough
to the rest of us: Walter Cunningham was sitting there lying his head
off. He didnt forget his lunch, he didnt have any. He had none today
nor would he have any tomorrow or the next day. He had probably
never seen three quarters together at the same time in his life.
I tried again: Walters one of the Cunninghams, Miss Caroline.
I beg your pardon, Jean Louise?
Thats okay, maam, youll get to know all the county folks after a
while. The Cunninghams never took anything they cant pay backno
church baskets and no scrip stamps. They never took anything off of
anybody, they get along on what they have. They dont have much, but
they get along on it.
My special knowledge of the Cunningham tribeone branch, that
is-was gained from events of last winter. Walters father was one of
Atticuss clients. After a dreary conversation in our livingroom one
night about his entailment, before Mr. Cunningham left he said, Mr.
Finch, I dont know when Ill ever be able to pay you.
Let that be the least of your worries, Walter, Atticus said.
When I asked Jem what entailment was, and Jem described it as a
condition of having your tail in a crack, I asked Atticus if Mr.
Cunningham would ever pay us.
Not in money, Atticus said, but before the years out Ill have
been paid. You watch.
We watched. One morning Jem and I found a load of stovewood in
the back yard. Later, a sack of hickory nuts appeared on the back steps.
With Christmas came a crate of smilax and holly. That spring when we
found a crokersack full of turnip greens, Atticus said Mr. Cunningham
had more than paid him.
Why does he pay you like that? I asked.
Because thats the only way he can pay me. He has no money.
Are we poor, Atticus?
Atticus nodded. We are indeed.
Jems nose wrinkled. Are we as poor as the Cunninghams?
Not exactly. The Cunninghams are country folks, farmers, and the
crash hit them hardest.
Atticus said professional people were poor because the farmers
were poor. As Maycomb County was farm country, nickels and dimes
were hard to come by for doctors and dentists and lawyers. Entailment
was only a part of Mr. Cunninghams vexations. The acres not entailed
were mortgaged to the hilt, and the little cash he made went to interest.
If he held his mouth right, Mr. Cunningham could get a WPA job, but
his land would go to ruin if he left it, and he was willing to go hungry to
keep his land and vote as he pleased. Mr. Cunningham, said Atticus,
came from a set breed of men.
As the Cunninghams had no money to pay a lawyer, they simply
paid us with what they had. Did you know, said Atticus, that Dr.
Reynolds works the same way? He charges some folks a bushel of
potatoes for delivery of a baby. Miss Scout, if you give me your
attention Ill tell you what entailment is. Jems definitions are very
nearly accurate sometimes.
If I could have explained these things to Miss Caroline, I would
have saved myself some inconvenience and Miss Caroline subsequent
mortification, but it was beyond my ability to explain things as well as
Atticus, so I said, Youre shamin him, Miss Caroline. Walter hasnt got
a quarter at home to bring you, and you cant use any stovewood.
Miss Caroline stood stock still, then grabbed me by the collar and
hauled me back to her desk. Jean Louise, Ive had about enough of you
this morning, she said. Youre starting off on the wrong foot in every
way, my dear. Hold out your hand.
I thought she was going to spit in it, which was the only reason
anybody in Maycomb held out his hand: it was a time-honored method
of sealing oral contracts. Wondering what bargain we had made, I
turned to the class for an answer, but the class looked back at me in
puzzlement. Miss Caroline picked up her ruler, gave me half a dozen
quick little pats, then told me to stand in the corner. A storm of
laughter broke loose when it finally occurred to the class that Miss
Caroline had whipped me.
When Miss Caroline threatened it with a similar fate the first grade
exploded again, becoming cold sober only when the shadow of Miss
Blount fell over them. Miss Blount, a native Maycombian as yet
uninitiated in the mysteries of the Decimal System, appeared at the
door hands on hips andannounced: If I hear another sound from this
room Ill burn up everybody in it. Miss Caroline, the sixth grade cannot
concentrate on the pyramids for all this racket!
My sojourn in the corner was a short one. Saved by the bell, Miss
Caroline watched the class file out for lunch. As I was the last to leave, I
saw her sink down into her chair and bury her head in her arms. Had
her conduct been more friendly toward me, I would have felt sorry for
her. She was a pretty little thing.
3
Catching Walter Cunningham in the schoolyard gave me some
pleasure, but when I was rubbing his nose in the dirt Jem came by and
told me to stop. Youre biggern he is, he said.
Hes as old as you, nearly, I said. He made me start off on the
wrong foot.
Let him go, Scout. Why?
He didnt have any lunch,I said, and explained my involvement
in Walters dietary affairs.
Walter had picked himself up and was standing quietly listening to
Jem and me. His fists were half cocked, as if expecting an onslaught
from both of us. I stomped at him to chase him away, but Jem put out
his hand and stopped me. He examined Walter with an air of
speculation. Your daddy Mr. Walter Cunningham from Old Sarum?
he asked, and Walter nodded.
Walter looked as if he had been raised on fish food: his eyes, as blue
as Dill Harriss, were red-rimmed and watery. There was no color in his
face except at the tip of his nose, which was moistly pink. He fingered
the straps of his overalls, nervously picking at the metal hooks.
Jem suddenly grinned at him. Come on home to dinner with us,
Walter, he said. Wed be glad to have you.
Walters face brightened, then darkened.
Jem said, Our daddys a friend of your daddys. Scout here, shes
crazyshe wont fight you any more.
I wouldnt be too certain of that, I said. Jems free dispensation of
my pledge irked me, but precious noontime minutes were ticking away.
Yeah Walter, I wont jump on you again. Dont you like butterbeans?
Our Cals a real good cook.
Walter stood where he was, biting his lip. Jem andI gave up, and
we were nearly to the Radley Place when Walter called, Hey, Im
comin!
When Walter caught up with us, Jem made pleasant conversation
with him. A haint lives there, he said cordially, pointing to the
Radley house. Ever hear about him, Walter?
Reckon I have, said Walter. Almost died first year I come to
school and et them pecansfolks say he pizened em and put em over
on the school side of the fence.
Jem seemed to have little fear of Boo Radley now that Walter and I
walked beside him. Indeed, Jem grew boastful: I went all the way up
to the house once, he said to Walter.
Anybody who went up to the house once oughta not to still run
every time he passes it, I said to the clouds above.
And whos runnin, Miss Priss?
You are, when aint anybody with you.
By the time we reached our front steps Walter had forgotten he was
a Cunningham. Jem ran to the kitchen and asked Calpurnia to set an
extra plate, we had company. Atticus greeted Walter and began a
discussion about crops neither Jem nor I could follow.
Reason I cant pass the first grade, Mr. Finch, is Ive had to stay
out ever spring an help Papa with the choppin, but theres anothern
at the house now thats field size.
Did you pay a bushel of potatoes for him? I asked, but Atticus
shook his head at me.
While Walter piled food on his plate, he and Atticus talked together
like two men, to the wonderment of Jem and me. Atticus was
expounding upon farm problems when Walter interrupted to ask if
there was any molasses in the house. Atticus summoned Calpurnia,
who returned bearing the syrup pitcher. She stood waiting for Walter
to help himself. Walter poured syrup on his vegetables and meat with a
generous hand. He would probably have poured it into his milk glass
had I not asked what the sam hill he was doing.
The silver saucer clattered when he replaced the pitcher, and he
quickly put his hands in his lap. Then he ducked his head.
Atticus shook his head at me again. But hes gone and drowned his
dinner in syrup, I protested. Hes poured it all over
It was then that Calpurnia requested my presence in the kitchen.
She was furious, and when she was furious Calpurnias grammar
became erratic. When in tranquility, her grammar was as good as
anybodys in Maycomb. Atticus said Calpurnia had more education
than most colored folks.
When she squinted down at me the tiny lines around her eyes
deepened. Theres some folks who dont eat like us, she whispered
fiercely, but you aint called on to contradict em at the table when
they dont. That boys yo compny and if he wants to eat up the table
cloth you let him, you hear?
He aint company, Cal, hes just a Cunningham
Hush your mouth! Dont matter who they are, anybody sets foot in
this houses yo compny, and dont you let me catch you remarkin on
their ways like you was so high and mighty! Yo folks might be bettern
the Cunninghams but it dont count for nothin the way youre
disgracin emif you cant act fit to eat at the table you can just set
here and eat in the kitchen!
Calpurnia sent me through the swinging door to the diningroom
with a stinging smack. I retrieved my plate and finished dinner in the
kitchen, thankful, though, that I was spared the humiliation of facing
them again. I told Calpurnia to just wait, Id fix her: one of these days
when she wasnt looking Id go off and drown myself in Barkers Eddy
and then shed be sorry. Besides, I added, shed already gotten me in
trouble once today: she had taught me to write and it was all her fault.
Hush your fussin, she said.
Jem and Walter returned to school ahead of me: staying behind to
advise Atticus of Calpurnias iniquities was worth a solitary sprint past
the Radley Place. She likes Jem bettern she likes me, anyway, I
concluded, and suggested that Atticus lose no time in packing her off.
Have you ever considered that Jem doesnt worry her half as
much? Atticuss voice was flinty. Ive no intention of getting rid of
her, now or ever. We couldnt operate a single day without Cal, have
you ever thought of that? You think about how much Cal does for you,
and you mind her, you hear?
I returned to school and hated Calpurnia steadily until a sudden
shriek shattered my resentments. I looked up to see Miss Caroline
standing in the middle of the room, sheer horror flooding her face.
Apparently she had revived enough to persevere in her profession.
Its alive! she screamed.
The male population of the class rushed as one to her assistance.
Lord, I thought, shes scared of a mouse. Little Chuck Little, whose
patience with all living things was phenomenal, said, Which way did
he go, Miss Caroline? Tell us where he went, quick! D.C. he turned
to a boy behind himD.C., shut the door and well catch him. Quick,
maam, whered he go?
Miss Caroline pointed a shaking finger not at the floor nor at a
desk, but to a hulking individual unknown to me. Little Chucks face
contracted and he said gently, You mean him, maam? Yessum, hes
alive. Did he scare you some way?
Miss Caroline said desperately, I was just walking by when it
crawled out of his hair... just crawled out of his hair
Little Chuck grinned broadly. There aint no need to fear a cootie,
maam. Aint you ever seen one? Now dont you be afraid, you just go
back to your desk and teach us some more.
Little Chuck Little was another member of the population who
didnt know where his next meal was coming from, but he was a born
gentleman. He put his hand under her elbow and led Miss Caroline to
the front of the room. Now dont you fret, maam, he said. There
aint no need to fear a cootie. Ill just fetch you some cool water.
The cooties host showed not the faintest interest in the furor he
had wrought. He searched the scalp above his forehead, located his
guest and pinched it between his thumb and forefinger.
Miss Caroline watched the process in horrid fascination. Little
Chuck brought water in a paper cup, and she drank it gratefully. Finally
she found her voice. What is your name, son? she asked softly.
The boy blinked. Who, me? Miss Caroline nodded.
Burris Ewell.
Miss Caroline inspected her roll-book. I have a Ewell here, but I
dont have a first name... would you spell your first name for me?
Dont know how. They call me Burrist home.
Well, Burris, said Miss Caroline, I think wed better excuse you
for the rest of the afternoon. I want you to go home and wash your
hair.
From her desk she produced a thick volume, leafed through its
pages and read for a moment. A good home remedy forBurris, I
want you to go home and wash your hair with lye soap. When youve
done that, treat your scalp with kerosene.
What fer, missus?
To get rid of theer, cooties. You see, Burris, the other children
might catch them, and you wouldnt want that, would you?
The boy stood up. He was the filthiest human I had ever seen. His
neck was dark gray, the backs of his hands were rusty, and his
fingernails were black deep into the quick. He peered at Miss Caroline
from a fist-sized clean space on his face. No one had noticed him,
probably, because Miss Caroline and I had entertained the class most
of the morning.
And Burris, said Miss Caroline, please bathe yourself before you
come back tomorrow.
The boy laughed rudely. You aint sendinme home, missus. I was
on the verge of leavinI done done my time for this year.
Miss Caroline looked puzzled. What do you mean by that?
The boy did not answer. He gave a short contemptuous snort.
One of the elderly members of the class answered her: Hes one of
the Ewells, maam,and I wondered if this explanation would be as
unsuccessful as my attempt. But Miss Caroline seemed willing to listen.
Whole schools full of em. They come first day every year and then
leave. The truant lady gets em here cause she threatens em with the
sheriff, but shes give up tryin to hold em. She reckons shes carried
out the law just gettin their names on the roll and runnin em here the
first day. Youre supposed to mark em absent the rest of the year...
But what about their parents? asked Miss Caroline, in genuine
concern.
Aint got no mother, was the answer, and their paws right
contentious.
Burris Ewell was flattered by the recital. Been comin to the first
day o the first grade fer three year now, he said expansively. Reckon
if Im smart this year theyll promote me to the second....
Miss Caroline said, Sit back down, please, Burris, and the
moment she said it I knew she had made a serious mistake. The boys
condescension flashed to anger.
You try and make me, missus.
Little Chuck Little got to his feet. Let him go, maam, he said.
Hes a mean one, a hard-down mean one. Hes liable to start
somethin, and theres some little folks here.
He was among the most diminutive of men, but when Burris Ewell
turned toward him, Little Chucks right hand went to his pocket.
Watch your step, Burris, he said. Id soons kill you as look at you.
Now go home.
Burris seemed to be afraid of a child half his height, and Miss
Caroline took advantage of his indecision: Burris, go home. If you
dont Ill call the principal, she said. Ill have to report this, anyway.
The boy snorted and slouched leisurely to the door.
Safely out of range, he turned and shouted: Report and be damned
to ye! Aint no snot-nosed slut of a schoolteacher ever born cn make
me do nothin! You aint makin me go nowhere, missus. You just
remember that, you aint makin me go nowhere!
He waited until he was sure she was crying, then he shuffled out of
the building.
Soon we were clustered around her desk, trying in our various ways
to comfort her. Hewas a real mean one... below the belt... you aint
called on to teach folks like that... them aint Maycombs ways, Miss
Caroline, not really... now dont you fret, maam. Miss Caroline, why
dont you read us a story? That cat thing was real fine this mornin....
Miss Caroline smiled, blew her nose, said, Thank you, darlings,
dispersed us, opened a book and mystified the first grade with a long
narrative about a toadfrog that lived in a hall.
When I passed the Radley Place for the fourth time that daytwice
at a full gallopmy gloom had deepened to match the house. If the
remainder of the school year were as fraught with drama as the first
day, perhaps it would be mildly entertaining, but the prospect of
spending nine months refraining from reading and writing made me
think of running away.
By late afternoon most of my traveling plans were complete; when
Jem and I raced each other up the sidewalk to meet Atticus coming
home from work, I didnt give him much of a race. It was our habit to
run meet Atticus the moment we saw him round the post office corner
in the distance. Atticus seemed to have forgotten my noontime fall
from grace; he was full of questions about school. My replies were
monosyllabic and he did not press me.
Perhaps Calpurnia sensed that my day had been a grim one: she let
me watch her fix supper. Shut your eyes and open your mouth and Ill
give you a surprise, she said.
It was not often that she made crackling bread, she said she never
had time, but with both of us at school today had been an easy one for
her. She knew I loved crackling bread.
I missed you today, she said. The house got so lonesome long
about two oclock I had to turn on the radio.
Why? Jemn me aint ever in the house unless its rainin.
I know, she said, But one of yous always in callin distance. I
wonder how much of the day I spend just callin after you. Well, she
said, getting up from the kitchen chair, its enough time to make a pan
of cracklinbread, I reckon. You run along now and let me get supper
on the table.
Calpurnia bent down and kissed me. I ran along, wondering what
had come over her. She had wanted to make up with me, that was it.
She had always been too hard on me, she had at last seen the error of
her fractious ways, she was sorry and too stubborn to say so. I was
weary from the days crimes.
After supper, Atticus sat down with the paper and called, Scout,
ready to read? The Lord sent me more than I could bear, and I went to
the front porch. Atticus followed me.
Something wrong, Scout?
I told Atticus I didnt feel very well and didnt think Id go to school
any more if it was all right with him.
Atticus sat down in the swing and crossed his legs. His fingers
wandered to his watchpocket; he said that was the only way he could
think. He waited in amiable silence, and I sought to reinforce my
position: You never went to school and you do all right, so Ill just stay
home too. You can teach me like Granddaddy taught you n Uncle
Jack.
No I cant, said Atticus. I have to make a living. Besides, theyd
put me in jail if I kept you at homedose of magnesia for you tonight
and school tomorrow.
Im feeling all right, really.
Thought so. Now whats the matter?
Bit by bit, I told him the days misfortunes. -and she said you
taught me all wrong, so we cant ever read any more, ever. Please dont
send me back, please sir.
Atticus stood up and walked to the end of the porch. When he
completed his examination of the wisteria vine he strolled back to me.
First of all, he said, if you can learn a simple trick, Scout, youll
get along a lot better with all kinds of folks. You never really
understand a person until you consider things from his point of view
Sir?
-until you climb into his skin and walk around in it.
Atticus said I had learned many things today, and Miss Caroline
had learned several things herself. She had learned not to hand
something to a Cunningham, for one thing, but if Walter and I had put
ourselves in her shoes wed have seen it was an honest mistake on her
part. We could not expect her to learn all Maycombs ways in one day,
and we could not hold her responsible when she knew no better.
Ill be dogged, I said. I didnt know no better than not to read to
her, and she held me responsiblelisten Atticus, I dont have to go to
school! I was bursting with a sudden thought. Burris Ewell,
remember? He just goes to school the first day. The truant lady reckons
shes carried out the law when she gets his name on the roll
You cant do that, Scout, Atticus said. Sometimes its better to
bend the law a little in special cases. In your case, the law remains
rigid. So to school you must go.
I dont see why I have to when he doesnt.
Then listen.
Atticus said the Ewells had been the disgrace of Maycomb for three
generations. None of them had done an honest days work in his
recollection. He said that some Christmas, when he was getting rid of
the tree, he would take me with him and show me where and how they
lived. They were people, but they lived like animals. They can goto
school any time they want to, when they show the faintest symptom of
wanting an education, said Atticus. There are ways of keeping them
in school by force, but its silly to force people like the Ewells into a new
environment
If I didnt go to school tomorrow, youd force me to.
Let us leave it at this, said Atticus dryly. You, Miss Scout Finch,
are of the common folk. You must obey the law. He said that the
Ewells were members of an exclusive society made up of Ewells. In
certain circumstances the common folk judiciously allowed them
certain privileges by the simple method of becoming blind to some of
the Ewells activities. They didnt have to go to school, for one thing.
Another thing, Mr. Bob Ewell, Burriss father, was permitted to hunt
and trap out of season.
Atticus, thats bad,I said. In Maycomb County, hunting out of
season was a misdemeanor at law, a capital felony in the eyes of the
populace.
Its against the law, all right, said my father, and its certainly
bad, but when a manspends his relief checks on green whiskey his
children have a way of crying from hunger pains. I dont know of any
landowner around here who begrudges those children any game their
father can hit.
Mr. Ewell shouldnt do that
Of course he shouldnt, but hell never change his ways. Are you
going to take out your disapproval on his children?
No sir,I murmured, and made a final stand: But if I keep on
goin to school, we cant ever read any more....
Thats really bothering you, isnt it?
Yes sir.
When Atticus looked down at me I saw the expression on his face
that always made me expect something. Do you know what a
compromise is? he asked.
Bending the law?
No, an agreement reached by mutual concessions. It works this
way, he said. If youll concede the necessity of going to school, well
go on reading every night just as we always have. Is it a bargain?
Yes sir!
Well consider it sealed without the usual formality, Atticus said,
when he saw me preparing to spit.
As I opened the front screen door Atticus said, By the way, Scout,
youd better not say anything at school about our agreement.
Why not?
Im afraid our activities would be received with considerable
disapprobation by the more learned authorities.
Jem and I were accustomed to our fathers last-will-and-testament
diction, and we were at all times free to interrupt Atticus for a
translation when it was beyond our understanding.
Huh, sir?
I never went to school, he said, but I have a feeling that if you tell
Miss Caroline we read every night shell get after me, and I wouldnt
want her after me.
Atticus kept us in fits that evening, gravely reading columns of
print about a man who sat on a flagpole for no discernible reason,
which was reason enough for Jem to spend the following Saturday aloft
in the treehouse. Jem sat from after breakfast until sunset and would
have remained overnight had not Atticus severed his supply lines. I had
spent most of the day climbing up and down, running errands for him,
providing him with literature, nourishment and water, and was
carrying him blankets for the night when Atticus said if I paid no
attention to him, Jem would come down. Atticus was right.
4
The remainder of my schooldays were no more auspicious than the
first. Indeed, they were an endless Project that slowly evolved into a
Unit, in which miles of construction paper and wax crayon were
expended by the State of Alabama in its well-meaning but fruitless
efforts to teach me Group Dynamics. What Jem called the Dewey
Decimal System was school-wide by the end of my first year, so I had
no chance to compare it with other teaching techniques. I could only
look around me: Atticus and my uncle, who went to school at home,
knew everythingat least, what one didnt know the other did.
Furthermore, I couldnt help noticing that my father had served for
years in the state legislature, elected each time without opposition,
innocent of the adjustments my teachers thought essential to the
development of Good Citizenship. Jem, educated on a half-Decimal
half-Duncecap basis, seemed to function effectively alone or in a group,
but Jem was a poor example: no tutorial system devised by man could
have stopped him from getting at books. As for me, I knew nothing
except what I gathered from Time magazine and reading everything I
could lay hands on at home, but as I inched sluggishly along the
treadmill of the Maycomb County school system, I could not help
receiving the impression that I was being cheated out of something.
Out of what I knew not, yet I did not believe that twelve years of
unrelieved boredom was exactly what the state had in mind for me.
As the year passed, released from school thirty minutes before Jem,
who had to stay until three oclock, I ran by the Radley Place as fast as I
could, not stopping until I reached the safety of our front porch. One
afternoon as I raced by, something caught my eye and caught it in such
a way that I took a deep breath, a long look around, and went back.
Two live oaks stood at the edge of the Radley lot; their roots
reached out into the side-road and made it bumpy. Something about
one of the trees attracted my attention.
Some tinfoil was sticking in a knot-hole just above my eye level,
winking at me in the afternoon sun. I stood on tiptoe, hastily looked
around once more, reached into the hole, and withdrew two pieces of
chewing gum minus their outer wrappers.
My first impulse was to get it into my mouth as quickly as possible,
but I remembered where I was. I ran home, and on our front porch I
examined my loot. The gum looked fresh. I sniffed it and it smelled all
right. I licked it and waited for a while. When I did not die I crammed it
into my mouth: Wrigleys Double-Mint.
When Jem came home he asked me where I got such a wad. I told
him I found it.
Dont eat things you find, Scout.
This wasnt on the ground, it was in a tree.
Jem growled.
Well it was, I said. It was sticking in that tree yonder, the one
comin from school.
Spit it out right now!
I spat it out. The tang was fading, anyway. Ive been chewin it all
afternoon and I aint dead yet, not even sick.
Jem stamped his foot. Dont you know youre not supposed to
even touch the trees over there? Youll get killed if you do!
You touched the house once!
That was different! You go gargleright now, you hear me?
Aint neither, itll take the taste outa my mouth.
You dont n Ill tell Calpurnia on you!
Rather than risk a tangle with Calpurnia, I did as Jem told me. For
some reason, my first year of school had wrought a great change in our
relationship: Calpurnias tyranny, unfairness, and meddling in my
business had faded to gentle grumblings of general disapproval. On my
part, I went to much trouble, sometimes, not to provoke her.
Summer was on the way; Jem and I awaited it with impatience.
Summer was our best season: it was sleeping on the back screened
porch in cots, or trying to sleep in the treehouse; summer was
everything good to eat; it was a thousand colors in a parched
landscape; but most of all, summer was Dill.
The authorities released us early the last day of school, and Jem
and I walked home together. Reckon old Dillll be coming home
tomorrow, I said.
Probably day after, said Jem. Missippi turns em loose a day
later.
As we came to the live oaks at the Radley Place I raised my finger to
point for the hundredth time to the knot-hole where I had found the
chewing gum, trying to make Jem believe I had found it there, and
found myself pointing at another piece of tinfoil.
I see it, Scout! I see it
Jem looked around, reached up, and gingerly pocketed a tiny shiny
package. We ran home, and on the front porch we looked at a small box
patchworked with bits of tinfoil collected from chewing-gum wrappers.
It was the kind of box wedding rings came in, purple velvet with a
minute catch. Jem flicked open the tiny catch. Inside were two
scrubbed and polished pennies, one on top of the other. Jem examined
them.
Indian-heads, he said. Nineteen-six and Scout, one of ems
nineteen-hundred. These are real old.
Nineteen-hundred, I echoed. Say
Hush a minute, Im thinkin.
Jem, you reckon thats somebodys hidin place?
Naw, dont anybody much but us pass by there, unless its some
grown persons
Grown folks dont have hidin places. You reckon we ought to keep
em, Jem?
I dont know what we could do, Scout. Whod we give em back to?
I know for a fact dont anybody go by thereCecil goes by the back
street an all the way around by town to get home.
Cecil Jacobs, who lived at the far end of our street next door to the
post office, walked a total of one mile per school day to avoid the
Radley Place and old Mrs. Henry Lafayette Dubose. Mrs. Dubose lived
two doors up the street from us; neighborhood opinion was unanimous
that Mrs. Dubose was the meanest old woman who ever lived. Jem
wouldnt go by her place without Atticus beside him.
What you reckon we oughta do, Jem?
Finders were keepers unless title was proven. Plucking an
occasional camellia, getting a squirt of hot milk from Miss Maudie
Atkinsons cow on a summer day, helping ourselves to someones
scuppernongs was part of our ethical culture, but money was different.
Tell you what, said Jem. Well keep em till school starts, then go
around and ask everybody if theyre theirs. Theyre some bus childs,
maybehe was too taken up with gettin outa school today an forgot
em. These are somebodys, I know that. See how theyve been slicked
up? Theyve been saved.
Yeah, but why should somebody wanta put away chewing gum like
that? You know it doesnt last.
I dont know, Scout. But these are important to somebody....
Hows that, Jem...?
Well, Indian-headswell, they come from the Indians. Theyre
real strong magic, they make you have good luck. Not like fried chicken
when youre not lookinfor it, but things like long life n good health,
n passin six-weeks tests... these are real valuable to somebody. Im
gonna put em in my trunk.
Before Jem went to his room, he looked for a long time at the
Radley Place. He seemed to be thinking again.
Two days later Dill arrived in ablaze of glory: he had ridden the
train by himself from Meridian to Maycomb Junction (a courtesy title
Maycomb Junction was in Abbott County) where he had been met by
Miss Rachel in Maycombs one taxi; he had eaten dinner in the diner,
he had seen two twins hitched together get off the train in Bay St. Louis
and stuck to his story regardless of threats. He had discarded the
abominable blue shorts that were buttoned to his shirts and wore real
short pants with a belt; he was somewhat heavier, no taller, and said he
had seen his father. Dills father was taller than ours, he had a black
beard (pointed), and was president of the L & N Railroad.
I helped the engineer for a while, said Dill, yawning.
In a pigs ear you did, Dill. Hush, said Jem. Whatll we play
today?
Tom and Sam and Dick, said Dill. Lets go in the front yard. Dill
wanted the Rover Boys because there were three respectable parts. He
was clearly tired of being our character man.
Im tired of those,I said. I was tired of playing Tom Rover, who
suddenly lost his memory in the middle of a picture show and was out
of the script until the end, when he was found in Alaska.
Make us up one, Jem, I said.
Im tired of makin em up.
Our first days of freedom, and we were tired. I wondered what the
summer would bring.
We had strolled to the front yard, where Dill stood looking down
the street at the dreary face of the Radley Place. Ismelldeath, he
said. I do, I mean it, he said, when I told him to shut up.
You mean when somebodys dyin you can smell it?
No, I mean I can smell somebody an tell if theyre gonna die. An
old lady taught me how. Dill leaned over and sniffed me. Jean-
LouiseFinch, you are going to die in three days.
Dill if you dont hush Ill knock you bowlegged. I mean it, now
Yawl hush, growled Jem, you act like you believe in Hot
Steams.
You act like you dont, I said.
Whats a Hot Steam? asked Dill.
Havent you ever walked along a lonesome road at night and
passed by a hot place? Jem asked Dill. A Hot Steams somebody who
cant get to heaven, just wallows around on lonesome roads an if you
walk through him, when you die youll be one too, an youll go around
at night suckin peoples breath
How can you keep from passing through one?
You cant, said Jem. Sometimes they stretch all the way across
the road, but if you hafta go through one you say, Angel-bright, life-indeath;
get off the road, dont suck my breath. That keeps em from
wrapping around you
Dont you believe a word he says, Dill, I said. Calpurnia says
thats nigger-talk.
Jem scowled darkly at me, but said, Well, are we gonna play
anything or not?
Lets roll in the tire, I suggested.
Jem sighed. You know Im too big.
You cn push.
I ran to the back yard and pulled an old car tire from under the
house. I slapped it up to the front yard. Im first, I said.
Dill said he ought to be first, he just got here.
Jem arbitrated, awarded me first push with an extra time for Dill,
and I folded myself inside the tire.
Until it happened I did not realize that Jem was offended by my
contradicting him on Hot Steams, and that he was patiently awaiting
an opportunity to reward me. He did, by pushing the tire down the
sidewalk with all the force in his body. Ground, sky and houses melted
into a mad palette, my ears throbbed, I was suffocating. I could not put
out my hands to stop, they were wedged between my chest and knees. I
could only hope that Jem would outrun the tire and me, or that I would
be stopped by a bump in the sidewalk. I heard him behind me, chasing
and shouting.
The tire bumped on gravel, skeetered across the road, crashed into
a barrier and popped me like a cork onto pavement. Dizzy and
nauseated, I lay on the cement and shook my head still, pounded my
ears to silence, and heard Jems voice: Scout, get away from there,
come on!
I raised my head and stared at the Radley Place steps in front of
me. I froze.
Come on, Scout, dont just lie there! Jem was screaming. Get up,
cantcha?
I got to my feet, trembling as I thawed.
Get the tire! Jem hollered. Bring it with you! Aint you got any
sense at all?
When I was able to navigate, I ran back to them as fast as my
shaking knees would carry me.
Why didnt you bring it? Jem yelled.
Why dont you get it? I screamed.
Jem was silent.
Go on, it aint far inside the gate. Why, you even touched the house
once, remember?
Jem looked at me furiously, could not decline, ran down the
sidewalk, treaded water at the gate, then dashed in and retrieved the
tire.
See there? Jem was scowling triumphantly. Nothin to it. I
swear, Scout, sometimes you act so much like a girl its mortifyin.
There was more to it than he knew, but I decided not to tell him.
Calpurnia appeared in the front door and yelled, Lemonade time!
You all get in outa that hot sun fore you fry alive! Lemonade in the
middle of the morning was a summertime ritual. Calpurnia set a
pitcher and three glasses on the porch, then went about her business.
Being out of Jems good graces did not worry me especially. Lemonade
would restore his good humor.
Jem gulped down his second glassful and slapped his chest. I
know what we are going to play, he announced. Something new,
something different.
What? asked Dill.
Boo Radley.
Jems head at times was transparent: he had thought that up to
make me understand he wasnt afraid of Radleys in any shape or form,
to contrast his own fearless heroism with my cowardice.
Boo Radley? How? asked Dill.
Jem said, Scout, you can be Mrs. Radley
I declare if I will. I dont think
Smatter? said Dill. Still scared?
He can get out at night when were all asleep.... I said.
Jem hissed. Scout, hows he gonna know what were doin?
Besides, I dont think hes still there. He died years ago and they stuffed
him up the chimney.
Dill said, Jem, you and me can play and Scout can watch if shes
scared.
I was fairly sure Boo Radley was inside that house, but I couldnt
prove it, and felt it best to keep my mouth shut or I would be accused of
believing in Hot Steams, phenomena I was immune to in the daytime.
Jem parceled out our roles: I was Mrs. Radley, and all I had to do
was come out and sweep the porch. Dill was old Mr. Radley: he walked
up and down the sidewalk and coughed when Jem spoke to him. Jem,
naturally, was Boo: he went under the front steps and shrieked and
howled from time to time.
As the summer progressed, so did our game. We polished and
perfected it, added dialogue and plot until we had manufactured a
small play upon which we rang changes every day.
Dill was a villains villain: he could get into any character part
assigned him, and appear tall if height was part of the devilry required.
He was as good as his worst performance; his worst performance was
Gothic. I reluctantly played assorted ladies who entered the script. I
never thought it as much fun as Tarzan, and I played that summer with
more than vague anxiety despite Jems assurances that Boo Radley was
dead and nothing would get me, with him and Calpurnia there in the
daytime and Atticus home at night.
Jem was a born hero.
It was a melancholy little drama, woven from bits and scraps of
gossip and neighborhood legend: Mrs. Radley had been beautiful until
she married Mr. Radley and lost all her money. She also lost most of
her teeth, her hair, and her right forefinger (Dills contribution. Boo bit
it off one night when he couldnt find any cats and squirrels to eat.);
she sat in the livingroom and cried most of the time, while Boo slowly
whittled away all the furniture in the house.
The three of us were the boys who got into trouble; I was the
probate judge, for a change; Dill led Jem away and crammed him
beneath the steps, poking him with the brushbroom. Jem would
reappear as needed in the shapes of the sheriff, assorted townsfolk, and
Miss Stephanie Crawford, who had more to say about the Radleys than
anybody in Maycomb.
When it was time to play Boos big scene, Jem would sneak into the
house, steal the scissors from the sewing-machine drawer when
Calpurnias back was turned, then sit in the swing and cut up
newspapers. Dill would walk by, cough at Jem, and Jem would fake a
plunge into Dills thigh. From where I stood it looked real.
When Mr. Nathan Radley passed us on his daily trip to town, we
would stand still and silent until he was out of sight, then wonder what
he would do to us if he suspected. Our activities halted when any of the
neighbors appeared, and once I saw Miss Maudie Atkinson staring
across the street at us, her hedge clippers poised in midair.
One day we were so busily playing Chapter XXV, Book II of One
Mans Family, we did not see Atticus standing on the sidewalk looking
at us, slapping a rolled magazine against his knee. The sun said twelve
noon.
What are you all playing? he asked.
Nothing, said Jem.
Jems evasion told me our game was a secret, so I kept quiet.
What are you doing with those scissors, then? Why are you tearing
up that newspaper? If its todays Ill tan you.
Nothing.
Nothing what? said Atticus.
Nothing, sir.
Give me those scissors, Atticus said. Theyre no things to play
with. Does this by any chance have anything to do with the Radleys?
No sir, said Jem, reddening.
I hope it doesnt, he said shortly, and went inside the house.
Je-m...
Shut up! Hes gone in the livingroom, he can hear us in there.
Safely in the yard, Dill asked Jem if we could play any more.
I dont know. Atticus didnt say we couldnt
Jem, I said, I think Atticus knows it anyway.
No he dont. If he did hed say he did.
I was not so sure, but Jem told me I was being a girl, that girls
always imagined things, thats why other people hated them so, and if I
started behaving like one I could just go off and find some to play with.
All right, you just keep it up then, I said. Youll find out.
Atticuss arrival was the second reason I wanted to quit the game.
The first reason happened the day I rolled into the Radley front yard.
Through all the head-shaking, quelling of nausea and Jem-yelling, I
had heard another sound, so low I could not have heard it from the
sidewalk. Someone inside the house was laughing.
5
My nagging got the better of Jem eventually, as I knew it would,
and to my relief we slowed down the game for a while. He still
maintained, however, that Atticus hadnt said we couldnt, therefore we
could; and if Atticus ever said we couldnt, Jem had thought of a way
around it: he would simply change the names of the characters and
then we couldnt be accused of playing anything.
Dill was in hearty agreement with this plan of action. Dill was
becoming something of a trial anyway, following Jem about. He had
asked me earlier in the summer to marry him, then he promptly forgot
about it. He staked me out, marked as his property, said I was the only
girl he would ever love, then he neglected me. I beat him up twice but it
did no good, he only grew closer to Jem. They spent days together in
the treehouse plotting and planning, calling me only when they needed
a third party. But I kept aloof from their more foolhardy schemes for a
while, and on pain of being called a girl, I spent most of the remaining
twilights that summer sitting with Miss Maudie Atkinson on her front
porch.
Jem and I had always enjoyed the free run of Miss Maudies yard if
we kept out of her azaleas, but our contact with her was not clearly
defined. Until Jem and Dill excluded me from their plans, she was only
another lady in the neighborhood, but a relatively benign presence.
Our tacit treaty with Miss Maudie was that we could play on her
lawn, eat her scuppernongs if we didnt jump on the arbor, and explore
her vast back lot, terms so generous we seldom spoke to her, so careful
were we to preserve the delicate balance of our relationship, but Jem
and Dill drove me closer to her with their behavior.
Miss Maudie hated her house: time spent indoors was time wasted.
She was a widow, a chameleon lady who worked in her flower beds in
an old straw hat and mens coveralls, but after her five oclock bath she
would appear on the porch and reign over the street in magisterial
beauty.
She loved everything that grew in Gods earth, even the weeds.
With one exception. If she found a blade of nut grass in her yard it was
like the Second Battle of the Marne: she swooped down upon it with a
tin tub and subjected it to blasts from beneath with a poisonous
substance she said was so powerful itd kill us all if we didnt stand out
of the way.
Why cant you just pull it up? I asked, after witnessing a
prolonged campaign against a blade not three inches high.
Pull it up, child, pull it up?She picked up the limp sprout and
squeezed her thumb up its tiny stalk. Microscopic grains oozed out.
Why, one sprig of nut grass can ruin a whole yard. Look here. When it
comes fall this dries up and the wind blows it all over Maycomb
County! Miss Maudies face likened such an occurrence unto an Old
Testament pestilence.
Her speech was crisp for a Maycomb County inhabitant. She called
us by all our names, and when she grinned she revealed two minute
gold prongs clipped to her eyeteeth. When I admired them and hoped I
would have some eventually, she said,Look here.With a click of her
tongue she thrust out her bridgework, a gesture of cordiality that
cemented our friendship.
Miss Maudies benevolence extended to Jem and Dill, whenever
they paused in their pursuits: we reaped the benefits of a talent Miss
Maudie had hitherto kept hidden from us. She made the best cakes in
the neighborhood. When she was admitted into our confidence, every
time she baked she made a big cake and three little ones, and she
would call across the street: Jem Finch, Scout Finch, Charles Baker
Harris, come here! Our promptness was always rewarded.
In summertime, twilights are long and peaceful. Often as not, Miss
Maudie and I would sit silently on her porch, watching the sky go from
yellow to pink as the sun went down, watching flights of martins sweep
low over the neighborhood and disappear behind the schoolhouse
rooftops.
Miss Maudie,I said one evening, do you think Boo Radleys still
alive?
His names Arthur and hes alive, she said. She was rocking
slowly in her big oak chair. Do you smell my mimosa? Its like angels
breath this evening.
Yessum. How do you know?
Know what, child?
That BMr. Arthurs still alive?
What a morbid question. But I suppose its a morbid subject. I
know hes alive, Jean Louise, because I havent seen him carried out
yet.
Maybe he died and they stuffed him up the chimney.
Where did you get such a notion?
Thats what Jem said he thought they did.
S-ss-ss. He gets more like Jack Finch every day.
Miss Maudie had known Uncle Jack Finch, Atticuss brother, since
they were children. Nearly the same age, they had grown up together at
Finchs Landing. Miss Maudie was the daughter of a neighboring
landowner, Dr. Frank Buford. Dr. Bufords profession was medicine
and his obsession was anything that grew in the ground, so he stayed
poor. Uncle Jack Finch confined his passion for digging to his window
boxes in Nashville and stayed rich. We saw Uncle Jack every
Christmas, and every Christmas he yelled across the street for Miss
Maudie to comemarry him. Miss Maudie would yell back, Call a little
louder, Jack Finch, and theyll hear you at the post office, I havent
heard you yet! Jem and I thought this a strange way to ask for a ladys
hand in marriage, but then Uncle Jack was rather strange. He said he
was trying to get Miss Maudies goat, that he had been trying
unsuccessfully for forty years, that he was the last person in the world
Miss Maudie would think about marrying but the first person she
thought about teasing, and the best defense to her was spirited offense,
all of which we understood clearly.
Arthur Radley just stays in the house, thats all, said Miss
Maudie. Wouldnt you stay in the house if you didnt want to come
out?
Yessum, but Id wanta come out. Why doesnt he?
Miss Maudies eyes narrowed. You know that story as well as I do.
I never heard why, though. Nobody ever told me why.
Miss Maudie settled her bridgework. You know old Mr. Radley
was a foot-washing Baptist
Thats what you are, aint it?
My shells not that hard, child. Im just a Baptist.
Dont you all believe in foot-washing?
We do. At home in the bathtub.
But we cant have communion with you all
Apparently deciding that it was easier to define primitive baptistry
than closed communion, Miss Maudie said: Foot-washers believe
anything thats pleasure is a sin. Did you know some of em came out of
the woods one Saturday and passed by this place and told me me and
my flowers were going to hell?
Your flowers, too?
Yes maam. Theyd burn right with me. They thought I spent too
much time in Gods outdoors and not enough time inside the house
reading the Bible.
My confidence in pulpit Gospel lessened at the vision of Miss
Maudie stewing forever in various Protestant hells. True enough, she
had an acid tongue in her head, and she did not go about the
neighborhood doing good, as did Miss Stephanie Crawford. But while
no one with a grain of sense trusted Miss Stephanie, Jem and I had
considerable faith in Miss Maudie. She had never told on us, had never
played cat-and-mouse with us, she was not at all interested in our
private lives. She was our friend. How so reasonable a creature could
live in peril of everlasting torment was incomprehensible.
That aint right, Miss Maudie. Youre the best lady I know.
Miss Maudie grinned. Thank you maam. Thing is, foot-washers
think women are a sin by definition. They take the Bible literally, you
know.
Is that why Mr. Arthur stays in the house, to keep away from
women?
Ive no idea.
It doesnt make sense to me. Looks like if Mr. Arthur was
hankerin after heaven hed come out on the porch at least. Atticus says
Gods loving folks like you love yourself
Miss Maudie stopped rocking, and her voice hardened. You are too
young to understand it, she said, but sometimes the Bible in the hand
of one man is worse than a whiskey bottle in the hand ofoh, of your
father.
I was shocked. Atticus doesnt drink whiskey, I said. He never
drunk a drop in his lifenome, yes he did. He said he drank some one
time and didnt like it.
Miss Maudie laughed. Wasnt talking about your father, she said.
What I meant was, if Atticus Finch drank until he was drunk he
wouldnt be as hard as some men are at their best. There are just some
kind of men whowhore so busy worrying about the next world
theyve never learned to live in this one, and you can look down the
street and see the results.
Do you think theyre true, all those things they say about BMr.
Arthur?
What things?
I told her.
That is three-fourths colored folks and one-fourth Stephanie
Crawford, said Miss Maudie grimly. Stephanie Crawford even told
me once she woke up in the middle of the night and found him looking
in the window at her. I said what did you do, Stephanie, move over in
the bed and make room for him? That shut her up a while.
I was sure it did. Miss Maudies voice was enough to shut anybody
up.
No, child, she said, that is a sad house. I remember Arthur
Radley when he was a boy. He always spoke nicely to me, no matter
what folks said he did. Spoke as nicely as he knew how.
You reckon hes crazy?
Miss Maudie shook her head. If hes not he should be by now. The
things that happen to people we never really know. What happens in
houses behind closed doors, what secrets
Atticus dont ever do anything to Jem and me in the house that he
dont do in the yard, I said, feeling it my duty to defend my parent.
Gracious child, I was raveling a thread, wasnt even thinking about
your father, but now that I am Ill say this: Atticus Finch is the same in
his house as he is on the public streets. Howd you like some fresh
poundcake to take home?
I liked it very much.
Next morning when I awakened I found Jem and Dill in the back
yard deep in conversation. When I joined them, as usual they said go
away.
Will not. This yards as much mine as it is yours, Jem Finch. I got
just as much right to play in it as you have.
Dill and Jem emerged from a brief huddle: If you stay youve got
to do what we tell you, Dill warned.
We-ll, I said, whos so high and mighty all of a sudden?
If you dont say youll do what we tell you, we aint gonna tell you
anything, Dill continued.
You act like you grew ten inches in the night! All right, what is it?
Jem said placidly, We are going to give a note to Boo Radley.
Just how?I was trying to fight down the automatic terror rising
in me. It was all right for Miss Maudie to talkshe was old and snug on
her porch. It was different for us.
Jem was merely going to put the note on the end of a fishing pole
and stick it through the shutters. If anyone came along, Dill would ring
the bell.
Dill raised his right hand. In it was my mothers silver dinner-bell.
Im goinaround to the side of the house, said Jem. We looked
yesterday from across the street, and theres a shutter loose. Think
maybe I can make it stick on the window sill, at least.
Jem
Now youre in it and you cant get out of it, youll just stay in it,
Miss Priss!
Okay, okay, but I dont wanta watch. Jem, somebody was
Yes you will, youll watchthe back end of the lot and Dills gonna
watch the front of the house an up the street, an if anybody comes hell
ring the bell. That clear?
All right then. Whatd you write him?
Dill said, Were askin him real politely to come out sometimes,
and tell us what he does in therewe said we wouldnt hurt him and
wed buy him an ice cream.
You allve gone crazy, hell kill us!
Dill said, Its my idea. I figure if hed come out and sit a spell with
us he might feel better.
How do you know he dont feel good?
Well howd you feel if youd been shut up for a hundred years with
nothin but cats to eat? I bet hes got a beard down to here
Like your daddys?
He aint got a beard, he Dill stopped, as if trying to remember.
Uh huh, caughtcha, I said. You said fore you were off the train
good your daddy had a black beard
If its all the same to you he shaved it off last summer! Yeah, an
Ive got the letter to prove ithe sent me two dollars, too!
Keep onI reckon he even sent you a mounted police uniform!
Thatn never showed up, did it? You just keep on tellin em, son
Dill Harris could tell the biggest ones I ever heard. Among other
things, he had been up in a mail plane seventeen times, he had been to
Nova Scotia, he had seen an elephant, and his granddaddy was
Brigadier General Joe Wheeler and left him his sword.
You all hush,said Jem. He scuttled beneath the house and came
out with a yellow bamboo pole. Reckon this is long enough to reach
from the sidewalk?
Anybody whos brave enough to go up and touch the house hadnt
oughta use a fishin pole, I said. Why dont you just knock the front
door down?
Thisisdifferent, said Jem, how many times do I have to tell
you that?
Dill took a piece of paper from his pocket and gave it to Jem. The
three of us walked cautiously toward the old house. Dill remained at
the light-pole on the front corner of the lot, and Jem and I edged down
the sidewalk parallel to the side of the house. I walked beyond Jem and
stood where I could see around the curve.
All clear, I said. Not a soul in sight.
Jem looked up the sidewalk to Dill, who nodded.
Jem attached the note to the end of the fishing pole, let the pole out
across the yard and pushed it toward the window he had selected. The
pole lacked several inches of being long enough, and Jem leaned over
as far as he could. I watched him making jabbing motions for so long, I
abandoned my post and went to him.
Cant get it off the pole, he muttered, or if I got it off I cant make
it stay. Gon back down the street, Scout.
I returned and gazed around the curve at the empty road.
Occasionally I looked back at Jem, who was patiently trying to place
the note on the window sill. It would flutter to the ground and Jem
would jab it up, until I thought if Boo Radley ever received it he
wouldnt be able to read it. I was looking down the street when the
dinner-bell rang.
Shoulder up, I reeled around to face Boo Radley and his bloody
fangs; instead, I saw Dill ringing the bell with all his might in Atticuss
face.
Jem looked so awful I didnt have the heart to tell him I told him
so. He trudged along, dragging the pole behind him on the sidewalk.
Atticus said, Stop ringing that bell.
Dill grabbed the clapper; in the silence that followed, I wished hed
start ringing it again. Atticus pushed his hat to the back of his head and
put his hands on his hips. Jem, he said, what were you doing?
Nothin, sir.
I dont want any of that. Tell me.
I waswe were just tryin to give somethin to Mr. Radley.
What were you trying to give him?
Just a letter.
Let me see it.
Jem held out a filthy piece of paper. Atticus took it and tried to read
it. Why do you want Mr. Radley to come out?
Dill said, We thought he might enjoy us... and dried up when
Atticus looked at him.
Son,he said to Jem, Im going to tell you something and tell you
one time: stop tormenting that man. That goes for the other two of
you.
What Mr. Radley did was his own business. If he wanted to come
out, he would. If he wanted to stay inside his own house he had the
right to stay inside free from the attentions of inquisitive children,
which was a mild term for the likes of us. How would we like it if
Atticus barged in on us without knocking, when we were in our rooms
at night? We were, in effect, doing the same thing to Mr. Radley. What
Mr. Radley did might seem peculiar to us, but it did not seem peculiar
to him. Furthermore, had it never occurred to us that the civil way to
communicate with another being was by the front door instead of a
side window? Lastly, we were to stay away from that house until we
were invited there, we were not to play an asinine game he had seen us
playing or make fun of anybody on this street or in this town-
We werent makinfun of him, we werent laughin at him, said
Jem, we were just
So that was what you were doing, wasnt it?
Makin fun of him?
No, said Atticus, putting his lifes history on display for the
edification of the neighborhood.
Jem seemed to swell a little. I didnt say we were doin that, I
didnt say it!
Atticus grinned dryly. You just told me, he said. You stop this
nonsense right now, every one of you.
Jem gaped at him.
You want to be a lawyer, dont you? Our fathers mouth was
suspiciously firm, as if he were trying to hold it in line.
Jem decided there was no point in quibbling, and was silent. When
Atticus went inside the house to retrieve a file he had forgotten to take
to work that morning, Jem finally realized that he had been done in by
the oldest lawyers trick on record. He waited a respectful distance
from the front steps, watched Atticus leave the house and walk toward
town. When Atticus was out of earshot Jem yelled after him: I thought
I wanted to be a lawyer but I aint so sure now!
6
Yes, said our father, when Jem asked him if we could go over and
sit by Miss Rachels fishpool with Dill, as this was his last night in
Maycomb. Tell him so long for me, and well see him next summer.
We leaped over the low wall that separated Miss Rachels yard from
our driveway. Jem whistled bob-white and Dill answered in the
darkness.
Not a breath blowing, said Jem. Looka yonder.
He pointed to the east. A gigantic moon was rising behind Miss
Maudies pecan trees. That makes it seem hotter, he said.
Cross in it tonight? asked Dill, not looking up. He was
constructing a cigarette from newspaper and string.
No, just the lady. Dont light that thing, Dill, youll stink up this
whole end of town.
There was a lady in the moon in Maycomb. She sat at a dresser
combing her hair.
Were gonna miss you, boy, I said. Reckon we better watch for
Mr. Avery?
Mr. Avery boarded across the street from Mrs. Henry Lafayette
Duboses house. Besides making change in the collection plate every
Sunday, Mr. Avery sat on the porch every night until nine oclock and
sneezed. One evening we were privileged to witness a performance by
him which seemed to have been his positively last, for he never did it
again so long as we watched. Jem and I were leaving Miss Rachels
front steps one night when Dill stopped us: Golly, looka yonder. He
pointed across the street. At first we saw nothing but a kudzu-covered
front porch, but a closer inspection revealed an arc of water descending
from the leaves and splashing in the yellow circle of the street light,
some ten feet from source to earth, it seemed to us. Jem said Mr. Avery
misfigured, Dill said he must drink a gallon a day, and the ensuing
contest to determine relative distances and respective prowess only
made me feel left out again, as I was untalented in this area.
Dill stretched, yawned, and said altogether too casually. I know
what, lets go for a walk.
He sounded fishy to me. Nobody in Maycomb just went for a walk.
Where to, Dill?
Dill jerked his head in a southerly direction.
Jem said, Okay. When I protested, he said sweetly, You dont
have to come along, Angel May.
You dont have to go. Remember
Jem was not one to dwell on past defeats: it seemed the only
message he got from Atticus was insight into the art of cross
examination. Scout, we aint gonna do anything, were just goin to the
street light and back.
We strolled silently down the sidewalk, listening to porch swings
creaking with the weight of the neighborhood, listening to the soft
night-murmurs of the grown people on our street. Occasionally we
heard Miss Stephanie Crawford laugh.
Well? said Dill.
Okay, said Jem. Why dont you go on home, Scout?
What are you gonna do?
Dill and Jem were simply going to peep in the window with the
loose shutter to see if they could get a look at Boo Radley, and if I didnt
want to go with them I could go straight home and keep my fat flopping
mouth shut, that was all.
But what in the sam holy hill did you wait till tonight?
Because nobody could see them at night, because Atticus would be
so deep in a book he wouldnt hear the Kingdom coming, because if
Boo Radley killed them theyd miss school instead of vacation, and
because it was easier to see inside a dark house in the dark than in the
daytime, did I understand?
Jem, please
Scout, Im tellin you for the last time, shut your trap or go home
I declare to the Lord youre gettin more like a girl every day!
With that, I had no option but to join them. We thought it was
better to go under the high wire fence at the rear of the Radley lot, we
stood less chance of being seen. The fence enclosed a large garden and
a narrow wooden outhouse.
Jem held up the bottom wire and motioned Dill under it. I
followed, and held up the wire for Jem. It was a tight squeeze for him.
Dont make a sound, he whispered. Dont get in a row of collards
whatever you do, theyll wake the dead.
With this thought in mind, I made perhaps one step per minute. I
moved faster when I saw Jem far ahead beckoning in the moonlight.
We came to the gate that divided the garden from the back yard. Jem
touched it. The gate squeaked.
Spit on it, whispered Dill.
Youve got us in a box, Jem, I muttered. We cant get out of here
so easy.
Sh-h. Spit on it, Scout.
We spat ourselves dry, and Jem opened the gate slowly, lifting it
aside and resting it on the fence. We were in the back yard.
The back of the Radley house was less inviting than the front: a
ramshackle porch ran the width of the house; there were two doors and
two dark windows between the doors. Instead of a column, a rough
two-by-four supported one end of the roof. An old Franklin stove sat in
a corner of the porch; above it a hat-rack mirror caught the moon and
shone eerily.
Ar-r, said Jem softly, lifting his foot.
Smatter?
Chickens, he breathed.
That we would be obliged to dodge the unseen from all directions
was confirmed when Dill ahead of us spelled G-o-d in a whisper. We
crept to the side of the house, around to the window with the hanging
shutter. The sill was several inches taller than Jem.
Give you a hand up, he muttered to Dill. Wait, though. Jem
grabbed his left wrist and my right wrist, I grabbed my left wrist and
Jems right wrist, we crouched, and Dill sat on our saddle. We raised
him and he caught the window sill.
Hurry, Jem whispered, we cant last much longer.
Dill punched my shoulder, and we lowered him to the ground.
Whatd you see?
Nothing. Curtains. Theres a little teeny light way off somewhere,
though.
Lets get away from here, breathed Jem. Lets go round in back
again. Sh-h, he warned me, as I was about to protest.
Lets try the back window.
Dill, no, I said.
Dill stopped and let Jem go ahead. When Jem put his foot on the
bottom step, the step squeaked. He stood still, then tried his weight by
degrees. The step was silent. Jem skipped two steps, put his foot on the
porch, heaved himself to it, and teetered a long moment. He regained
his balance and dropped to his knees. He crawled to the window, raised
his head and looked in.
Then I saw the shadow. It was theshadow of a man with a hat on.
At first I thought it was a tree, but there was no wind blowing, and treetrunks
never walked. The back porch was bathed in moonlight, and the
shadow, crisp as toast, moved across the porch toward Jem.
Dill saw it next. He put his hands to his face.
When it crossed Jem, Jem saw it. He put his arms over his head
and went rigid.
The shadow stopped about a foot beyond Jem. Its arm came out
from its side, dropped, and was still. Then it turned and moved back
across Jem, walked along the porch and off the side of the house,
returning as it had come.
Jem leaped off the porch and galloped toward us. He flung open
the gate, danced Dill and me through, and shooed us between two rows
of swishing collards. Halfway through the collards I tripped; as I
tripped the roar of a shotgun shattered the neighborhood.
Dill and Jem dived beside me. Jems breath came in sobs: Fence
by the schoolyard!--hurry, Scout!
Jem held the bottom wire; Dill and I rolled through and were
halfway to the shelter of the schoolyards solitary oak when we sensed
that Jem was not with us. We ran back and found him struggling in the
fence, kicking his pants off to get loose. He ran to the oak tree in his
shorts.
Safely behind it, we gave way to numbness, but Jems mind was
racing: We gotta get home, theyll miss us.
We ran across the schoolyard, crawled under the fence to Deers
Pasture behind our house, climbed our back fence and were at the back
steps before Jem would let us pause to rest.
Respiration normal, the three of us strolled as casually as we could
to the front yard. We looked down the street and saw a circle of
neighbors at the Radley front gate.
We better go down there, said Jem. Theyll think its funny if we
dont show up.
Mr. Nathan Radley was standing inside his gate, a shotgun broken
across his arm. Atticus was standing beside Miss Maudie and Miss
Stephanie Crawford. Miss Rachel and Mr. Avery were near by. None of
them saw us come up.
We eased in beside Miss Maudie, who looked around. Where were
you all, didnt you hear the commotion?
What happened? asked Jem.
Mr. Radley shot at a Negro in his collard patch.
Oh. Did he hit him?
No, said Miss Stephanie. Shot in the air. Scared him pale,
though. Says if anybody sees a white nigger around, thats the one. Says
hes got the other barrel waitinfor the next sound he hears in that
patch, an next time he wont aim high, be it dog, nigger, or-Jem
Finch!
Maam? asked Jem.
Atticus spoke. Wherere your pants, son?
Pants, sir?
Pants.
It was no use. In his shorts before God and everybody. I sighed.
AhMr. Finch?
In the glare from the streetlight, I could see Dill hatching one: his
eyes widened, his fat cherub face grew rounder.
What is it, Dill? asked Atticus.
AhI won em from him, he said vaguely.
Won them? How?
Dills hand sought the back of his head. He brought it forward and
across his forehead. We were playin strip poker up yonder by the
fishpool, he said.
Jem and I relaxed. The neighbors seemed satisfied: they all
stiffened. But what was strip poker?
We had no chance to find out: Miss Rachel went off like the town
fire siren: Do-o-o Jee-sus, Dill Harris! Gamblinby my fishpool? Ill
strip-poker you, sir!
Atticus saved Dill from immediate dismemberment. Just a
minute, Miss Rachel, he said. Ive never heard of em doing that
before. Were you all playing cards?
Jem fielded Dills fly with his eyes shut: No sir, just with matches.
I admired my brother. Matches were dangerous, but cards were
fatal.
Jem, Scout, said Atticus, I dont want to hear of poker in any
form again. Go by Dills and get your pants, Jem. Settle it yourselves.
Dont worry, Dill,said Jem, as we trotted up the sidewalk, she
aint gonna get you. Hell talk her out of it. That was fast thinkin, son.
Listen... you hear?
We stopped, and heard Atticuss voice: ...not serious... they all go
through it, Miss Rachel....
Dill was comforted, but Jem and I werent. There was the problem
of Jem showing up some pants in the morning.
d give you some of mine,said Dill, as we came to Miss Rachels
steps. Jem said he couldnt get in them, but thanks anyway. We said
good-bye, and Dill went inside the house. He evidently remembered he
was engaged to me, for he ran back out and kissed me swiftly in front of
Jem. Yawl write, hear? he bawled after us.
Had Jems pants been safely on him, we would not have slept much
anyway. Every night-sound I heard from my cot on the back porch was
magnified three-fold; every scratch of feet on gravel was Boo Radley
seeking revenge, every passing Negro laughing in the night was Boo
Radley loose and after us; insects splashing against the screen were
Boo Radleys insane fingers picking the wire to pieces; the chinaberry
trees were malignant, hovering, alive. I lingered between sleep and
wakefulness until I heard Jem murmur.
Sleep, Little Three-Eyes?
Are you crazy?
Sh-h. Atticuss lights out.
In the waning moonlight I saw Jem swing his feet to the floor.
Im goin after em, he said.
I sat upright. You cant. I wont let you.
He was struggling into his shirt. Ive got to.
You do an Ill wake up Atticus.
You do and Ill kill you.
I pulled him down beside me on the cot. I tried to reason with him.
Mr. Nathans gonna find em in the morning, Jem. He knows you lost
em. When he shows em to Atticus itll be pretty bad, thats all there is
to it. Gon back to bed.
Thats what I know, said Jem. Thats why Im goin after em.
I began to feel sick. Going back to that place by himselfI
remembered Miss Stephanie: Mr. Nathan had the other barrel waiting
for the next sound he heard, be it nigger, dog... Jem knew that better
than I.
I was desperate: Look, it aint worth it, Jem. A lickin hurts but it
doesnt last. Youll get your head shot off, Jem. Please...
He blew out his breath patiently. Iits like this, Scout, he
muttered. Atticus aint ever whipped me since I can remember. I
wanta keep it that way.
This was a thought. It seemed that Atticus threatened us every
other day. You mean hes never caught you at anything.
Maybe so, butI just wanta keep it that way, Scout. We shouldna
done that tonight, Scout.
It was then, I suppose, that Jem and I first began to part company.
Sometimes I did not understand him, but my periods of bewilderment
were short-lived. This was beyond me. Please, I pleaded, cantcha
just think about it for a minuteby yourself on that place
Shut up!
Its not like hed never speak to you again or somethin... Im
gonna wake him up, Jem, I swear I am
Jem grabbed my pajama collar and wrenched it tight. Then Im
goin with you I choked.
No you aint, youll just make noise.
It was no use. I unlatched the back door and held it while he crept
down the steps. It must have been two oclock. The moon was setting
and the lattice-work shadows were fading into fuzzy nothingness.
Jems white shirt-tail dipped and bobbed like a small ghost dancing
away to escape the coming morning. A faint breeze stirred and cooled
the sweat running down my sides.
He went the back way, through Deers Pasture, across the
schoolyard and around to the fence, I thoughtat least that was the
way he was headed. It would take longer, so it was not time to worry
yet. I waited until it was time to worry and listened for Mr. Radleys
shotgun. Then I thought I heard the back fence squeak. It was wishful
thinking.
Then I heard Atticus cough. I held my breath. Sometimes when we
made a midnight pilgrimage to the bathroom we would find him
reading. He said he often woke up during the night, checked on us, and
read himself back to sleep. I waited for his light to go on, straining my
eyes to see it flood the hall. It stayed off, and I breathed again.
The night-crawlers had retired, but ripe chinaberries drummed on
the roof when the wind stirred, and the darkness was desolate with the
barking of distant dogs.
There he was, returning to me. His white shirt bobbed over the
back fence and slowly grew larger. He came up the back steps, latched
the door behind him, and sat on his cot. Wordlessly, he held up his
pants. He lay down, and for a while I heard his cot trembling. Soon he
was still. I did not hear him stir again.
7
Jem stayed moody and silent for a week. As Atticus had once
advised me to do, I tried to climb into Jems skin and walk around in it:
if I had gone alone to the Radley Place at two in the morning, my
funeral would have been held the next afternoon. So I left Jem alone
and tried not to bother him.
School started. The second grade was as bad as the first, only
worsethey still flashed cards at you and wouldnt let you read or
write. Miss Carolines progress next door could be estimated by the
frequency of laughter; however, the usual crew had flunked the first
grade again, and were helpful in keeping order. The only thing good
about the second grade was that this year I had to stay as late as Jem,
and we usually walked home together at three oclock.
One afternoon when we were crossing the schoolyard toward home,
Jem suddenly said: Theres something I didnt tell you.
As this was his first complete sentence in several days, I
encouraged him: About what?
About that night.
Youve never told me anything about that night, I said.
Jem waved my words away as if fanning gnats. He was silent for a
while, then he said, When I went back for my breechesthey were all
in a tangle when I was gettin out of em, I couldnt get em loose. When
I went back Jem took a deep breath. When I went back, they were
folded across the fence... like they were expectin me.
Across
And something else Jems voice was flat. Show you when we
get home. Theyd been sewed up. Not like a lady sewed em, like
somethin Id try to do. All crooked. Its almost like
-somebody knew you were comin back for em.
Jem shuddered. Like somebody was readin my mind... like
somebody could tell what I was gonna do. Cant anybody tell what Im
gonna do lest they know me, can they, Scout?
Jems question was an appeal. I reassured him: Cant anybody tell
what youre gonna do lest they live in the house with you, and even I
cant tell sometimes.
We were walking past our tree. In its knot-hole rested a ball of gray
twine.
Dont take it, Jem, I said. This is somebodys hidin place.
I dont think so, Scout.
Yes it is. Somebody like Walter Cunningham comes down here
every recess and hides his thingsand we come along and take em
away from him. Listen, lets leave it and wait a couple of days. If it aint
gone then, well take it, okay?
Okay, you might be right, said Jem. It must be some little kids
placehides his things from the bigger folks. You know its only when
schools in that weve found things.
Yeah, I said, but we never go by here in the summertime.
We went home. Next morning the twine was where we had left it.
When it was still there on the third day, Jem pocketed it. From then on,
we considered everything we found in the knot-hole our property.
The second grade was grim, but Jem assured me that the older I got
the better school would be, that he started off the same way, and it was
not until one reached the sixth grade that one learned anything of
value. The sixth grade seemed to please him from the beginning: he
went through a brief Egyptian Period that baffled mehe tried to walk
flat a great deal, sticking one arm in front of him and one in back of
him, putting one foot behind the other. He declared Egyptians walked
that way; I said if they did I didnt see how they got anything done, but
Jem said they accomplished more than the Americans ever did, they
invented toilet paper and perpetual embalming, and asked where
would we be today if they hadnt? Atticus told me to delete the
adjectives and Id have the facts.
There are no clearly defined seasons in South Alabama; summer
drifts into autumn, and autumn is sometimes never followed by winter,
but turns to a days-old spring that melts into summer again. That fall
was a long one, hardly cool enough for a light jacket. Jem and I were
trotting in our orbit one mild October afternoon when our knot-hole
stopped us again. Something white was inside this time.
Jem let me do the honors: I pulled out two small images carved in
soap. One was the figure of a boy, the other wore a crude dress.
Before I remembered that there was no such thing as hoo-dooing, I
shrieked and threw them down.
Jem snatched them up. Whats the matter with you? he yelled. He
rubbed the figures free of red dust. These are good, he said. Ive
never seen any these good.
He held them down to me. They were almost perfect miniatures of
two children. The boy had on shorts, and a shock of soapy hair fell to
his eyebrows. I looked up at Jem. A point of straight brown hair kicked
downwards from his part. I had never noticed it before.
Jem looked from the girl-doll to me. The girl-doll wore bangs. So
did I.
These are us, he said.
Who did em, you reckon?
Who do we know around here who whittles? he asked.
Mr. Avery.
Mr. Avery just does like this. I mean carves.
Mr. Avery averaged a stick of stovewood per week; he honed it
down to a toothpick and chewed it.
Theres old Miss Stephanie Crawfords sweetheart, I said.
He carves all right, but he lives down the country. When would he
ever pay any attention to us?
Maybe he sits on the porch and looks at us instead of Miss
Stephanie. If I was him, I would.
Jem stared at me so long I asked what was the matter, but got
Nothing, Scout for an answer. When we went home, Jem put the dolls
in his trunk.
Less than two weeks later we found a whole package of chewing
gum, which we enjoyed, the fact that everything on the Radley Place
was poison having slipped Jems memory.
The following week the knot-hole yielded a tarnished medal. Jem
showed it to Atticus, who said it was a spelling medal, that before we
were born the Maycomb County schools had spelling contests and
awarded medals to the winners. Atticus said someone must have lost it,
and had we asked around? Jem camel-kicked me when I tried to say
where we had found it. Jem asked Atticus if he remembered anybody
who ever won one, and Atticus said no.
Our biggest prize appeared four days later. It was a pocket watch
that wouldnt run, on a chain with an aluminum knife.
You reckon its white gold, Jem?
Dont know. Ill show it to Atticus.
Atticus said it would probably be worth ten dollars, knife, chain and
all, if it were new. Did you swap with somebody at school? he asked.
Oh, no sir! Jem pulled out his grandfathers watch that Atticus let
him carry once a week if Jem were careful with it. On the days he
carried the watch, Jem walked on eggs. Atticus, if its all right with
you, Id rather have this one instead. Maybe I can fix it.
When the new wore off his grandfathers watch, and carrying it
became a days burdensome task, Jem no longer felt the necessity of
ascertaining the hour every five minutes.
He did a fair job, only one spring and two tiny pieces left over, but
the watch would not run. Oh-h, he sighed, itll never go. Scout-?
Huh?
You reckon we oughta write a letter to whoevers leaving us these
things?
Thatd be right nice, Jem, we can thank emwhats wrong?
Jem was holding his ears, shaking his head from side to side. I
dont get it, I just dont get itI dont know why, Scout... He looked
toward the livingroom. Ive gotta good mind to tell Atticus-no, I
reckon not.
Ill tell him for you.
No, dont do that, Scout. Scout?
Wha-t?
He had been on the verge of telling me something all evening; his
face would brighten and he would lean toward me, then he would
change his mind. He changed it again. Oh, nothin.
Here, lets write a letter.I pushed a tablet and pencil under his
nose.
Okay. Dear Mister...
How do you know its a man? I bet its Miss Maudiebeen bettin
that for a long time.
Ar-r, Miss Maudie cant chew gum Jem broke into a grin. You
know, she can talk real pretty sometimes. One time I asked her to have
a chew and she said no thanks, thatchewing gum cleaved to her
palate and rendered her speechless, said Jem carefully. Doesnt that
sound nice?
Yeah, she can say nice things sometimes. She wouldnt have a
watch and chain anyway.
Dear sir, said Jem. We appreciate theno, we appreciate
everything which you have put into the tree for us. Yours very truly,
Jeremy Atticus Finch.
He wont know who you are if you sign it like that, Jem.
Jem erased his name and wrote, Jem Finch. I signed, Jean
Louise Finch (Scout), beneath it. Jem put the note in an envelope.
Next morning on the way to school he ran ahead of me and stopped
at the tree. Jem was facing me when he looked up, and I saw him go
stark white.
Scout!
I ran to him.
Someone had filled our knot-hole with cement.
Dont you cry, now, Scout... dont cry now, dont you worry he
muttered at me all the way to school.
When we went home for dinner Jem bolted his food, ran to the
porch and stood on the steps. I followed him. Hasnt passed by yet, he
said.
Next day Jem repeated his vigil and was rewarded.
Hidy do, Mr. Nathan, he said.
Morning Jem, Scout, said Mr. Radley, as he went by.
Mr. Radley, said Jem.
Mr. Radley turned around.
Mr. Radley, ahdid you put cement in that hole in that tree down
yonder?
Yes, he said. I filled it up.
Whyd you do it, sir?
Trees dying. You plug em with cement when theyre sick. You
ought to know that, Jem.
Jem said nothing more about it until late afternoon. When we
passed our tree he gave it a meditative pat on its cement, and remained
deep in thought. He seemed to be working himself into a bad humor, so
I kept my distance.
As usual, we met Atticus coming home from work that evening.
When we were at our steps Jem said, Atticus, look down yonder at
that tree, please sir.
What tree, son?
The one on the corner of the Radley lot comin from school.
Yes?
Is that tree dyin?
Why no, son, I dont think so. Look at the leaves, theyre all green
and full, no brown patches anywhere
It aint even sick?
That trees as healthy as you are, Jem. Why?
Mr. Nathan Radley said it was dyin.
Well maybe it is. Im sure Mr. Radley knows more about his trees
than we do.
Atticus left us on the porch. Jem leaned on a pillar, rubbing his
shoulders against it.
Do you itch, Jem? I asked as politely as I could. He did not
answer. Come on in, Jem, I said.
After while.
He stood there until nightfall, and I waited for him. When we went
in the house I saw he had been crying; his face was dirty in the right
places, but I thought it odd that I had not heard him.
8
For reasons unfathomable to the most experienced prophets in
Maycomb County, autumn turned to winter that year. We had two
weeks of the coldest weather since 1885, Atticus said. Mr. Avery said it
was written on the Rosetta Stone that when children disobeyed their
parents, smoked cigarettes and made war on each other, the seasons
would change: Jem and I were burdened with the guilt of contributing
to the aberrations of nature, thereby causing unhappiness to our
neighbors and discomfort to ourselves.
Old Mrs. Radley died that winter, but her death caused hardly a
ripplethe neighborhood seldom saw her, except when she watered
her cannas. Jem and I decided that Boo had got her at last, but when
Atticus returned from the Radley house he said she died of natural
causes, to our disappointment.
Ask him, Jem whispered.
You ask him, youre the oldest.
Thats why you oughta ask him.
Atticus, I said, did you see Mr. Arthur?
Atticus looked sternly around his newspaper at me: I did not.
Jem restrained me from further questions. He said Atticus was still
touchous about us and the Radleys and it wouldnt do to push him any.
Jem had a notion that Atticus thought our activities that night last
summer were not solely confined to strip poker. Jem had no firm basis
for his ideas, he said it was merely a twitch.
Next morning I awoke, looked out the window and nearly died of
fright. My screams brought Atticus from his bathroom half-shaven.
The worlds endin, Atticus! Please do something-! I dragged him
to the window and pointed.
No its not, he said. Its snowing.
Jem asked Atticus would it keep up. Jem had never seen snow
either, but he knew what it was. Atticus said he didnt know any more
about snow than Jem did. I think, though, if its watery like that, itll
turn to rain.
The telephone rang and Atticus left the breakfast table to answer it.
That was Eula May, he said when he returned. I quoteAs it has not
snowed in Maycomb County since 1885, there will be no school today.
Eula May was Maycombs leading telephone operator. She was
entrusted with issuing public announcements, wedding invitations,
setting off the fire siren, and giving first-aid instructions when Dr.
Reynolds was away.
When Atticus finally called us to order and bade us look at our
plates instead of out the windows, Jem asked, How do you make a
snowman?
I havent the slightest idea, said Atticus. I dont want you all to
be disappointed, but I doubt if therell be enough snow for a snowball,
even.
Calpurnia came in and said she thought it was sticking. When we
ran to the back yard, it was covered with a feeble layer of soggy snow.
We shouldnt walk about in it, said Jem. Look, every step you
takes wasting it.
I looked back at my mushy footprints. Jem said if we waited until it
snowed some more we could scrape it all up for a snowman. I stuck out
my tongue and caught a fat flake. It burned.
Jem, its hot!
No it aint, its so cold it burns. Now dont eat it, Scout, youre
wasting it. Let it come down.
But I want to walk in it.
I know what, we can go walk over at Miss Maudies.
Jem hopped across the front yard. I followed in his tracks. When
we were on the sidewalk in front of Miss Maudies, Mr. Avery accosted
us. He had a pink face and a big stomach below his belt.
See what youve done? he said. Hasnt snowed in Maycomb since
Appomattox. Its bad children like you makes the seasons change.
I wondered if Mr. Avery knew how hopefully we had watched last
summer for him to repeat his performance, and reflected that if this
was our reward, there was something to say for sin. I did not wonder
where Mr. Avery gathered his meteorological statistics: they came
straight from the Rosetta Stone.
Jem Finch, you Jem Finch!
Miss Maudies callin you, Jem.
You all stay in the middle of the yard. Theres some thrift buried
under the snow near the porch. Dont step on it!
Yessum! called Jem. Its beautiful, aint it, Miss Maudie?
Beautiful my hind foot! If it freezes tonight itll carry off all my
azaleas!
Miss Maudies old sunhat glistened with snow crystals. She was
bending over some small bushes, wrapping them in burlap bags. Jem
asked her what she was doing that for.
Keep em warm, she said.
How can flowers keep warm? They dont circulate.
I cannot answer that question, Jem Finch. All I know is if it freezes
tonight these plantsll freeze, so you cover em up. Is that clear?
Yessum. Miss Maudie?
What, sir?
Could Scout and me borrow some of your snow?
Heavens alive, take it all! Theres an old peach basket under the
house, haul it off in that. Miss Maudies eyes narrowed. Jem Finch,
what are you going to do with my snow?
Youll see, said Jem, and we transferred as much snow as we
could from Miss Maudies yard to ours, a slushy operation.
What are we gonna do, Jem? I asked.
Youll see, he said. Now get the basket and haul all the snow you
can rake up from the back yard to the front. Walk back in your tracks,
though, he cautioned.
Are we gonna have a snow baby, Jem?
No, a real snowman. Gotta work hard, now.
Jem ran to the back yard, produced the garden hoe and began
digging quickly behind the woodpile, placing any worms he found to
one side. He went in the house, returned with the laundry hamper,
filled it with earth and carried it to the front yard.
When we had five baskets of earth and two baskets of snow, Jem
said we were ready to begin.
Dont you think this is kind of a mess? I asked.
Looks messy now, but it wont later, he said.
Jem scooped up an armful of dirt, patted it into a mound on which
he added another load, and another until he had constructed a torso.
Jem, I aint ever heard of a nigger snowman, I said.
He wont be black long, he grunted.
Jem procured some peachtree switches from the back yard, plaited
them, and bent them into bones to be covered with dirt.
He looks like Stephanie Crawford with her hands on her hips, I
said. Fat in the middle and little-bitty arms.
Ill make em bigger.Jem sloshed water over the mud man and
added more dirt. He looked thoughtfully at it for a moment, then he
molded a big stomach below the figures waistline. Jem glanced at me,
his eyes twinkling: Mr. Averys sort of shaped like a snowman, aint
he?
Jem scooped up some snow and began plastering it on. He
permitted me to cover only the back, saving the public parts for
himself. Gradually Mr. Avery turned white.
Using bits of wood for eyes, nose, mouth, and buttons, Jem
succeeded in making Mr. Avery look cross. A stick of stovewood
completed the picture. Jem stepped back and viewed his creation.
Its lovely, Jem, I said. Looks almost like hed talk to you.
It is, aint it? he said shyly.
We could not wait for Atticus to come home for dinner, but called
and said we had a big surprise for him. He seemed surprised when he
saw most of the back yard in the front yard, but he said we had done a
jim-dandy job. I didnt know how you were going to do it,he said to
Jem, but from now on Ill never worry about whatll become of you,
son, youll always have an idea.
Jems ears reddened from Atticuss compliment, but he looked up
sharply when he saw Atticus stepping back. Atticus squinted at the
snowman a while. He grinned, then laughed. Son, I cant tell what
youre going to bean engineer, a lawyer, or a portrait painter. Youve
perpetrated a near libel here in the front yard. Weve got to disguise
this fellow.
Atticus suggested that Jem hone down his creations front a little,
swap a broom for the stovewood, and put an apron on him.
Jem explained that if he did, the snowmanwould become muddy
and cease to be a snowman.
I dont care what you do, so long as you do something, said
Atticus. You cant go around making caricatures of the neighbors.
Aint a characterture, said Jem. It looks just like him.
Mr. Avery might not think so.
I know what! said Jem. He raced across the street, disappeared
into Miss Maudies back yard and returned triumphant. He stuck her
sunhat on the snowmans head and jammed her hedge-clippers into
the crook of his arm. Atticus said that would be fine.
Miss Maudie opened her front door and came out on the porch. She
looked across the street at us. Suddenly she grinned. Jem Finch, she
called. You devil, bring me back my hat, sir!
Jem looked up at Atticus, who shook his head. Shes just fussing,
he said. Shes really impressed with your-accomplishments.
Atticus strolled over to Miss Maudies sidewalk, where they
engaged in an arm-waving conversation, the only phrase of which I
caught was ...erected an absolute morphodite in that yard! Atticus,
youll never raise em!
The snow stopped in the afternoon, the temperature dropped, and
by nightfall Mr. Averys direst predictions came true: Calpurnia kept
every fireplace in the house blazing, but we were cold. When Atticus
came home that evening he said we were in for it, and asked Calpurnia
if she wanted to stay with us for the night. Calpurnia glanced up at the
high ceilings and long windows and said she thought shed be warmer
at her house. Atticus drove her home in the car.
Before I went to sleep Atticus put more coal on the fire in my room.
He said the thermometer registered sixteen, that it was the coldest
night in his memory, and that our snowman outside was frozen solid.
Minutes later, it seemed, I was awakened by someone shaking me.
Atticuss overcoat was spread across me. Is it morning already?
Baby, get up.
Atticus was holding out my bathrobe and coat. Put your robe on
first, he said.
Jem was standing beside Atticus, groggy and tousled. He was
holding his overcoat closed at the neck, his other hand was jammed
into his pocket. He looked strangely overweight.
Hurry, hon, said Atticus. Herere your shoes and socks.
Stupidly, I put them on. Is it morning?
No, its a little after one. Hurry now.
That something was wrong finally got through to me. Whats the
matter?
By then he did not have to tell me. Just as the birds know where to
go when it rains, I knew when there was trouble in our street. Soft
taffeta-like sounds and muffled scurrying sounds filled me with
helpless dread.
Whose is it?
Miss Maudies, hon, said Atticus gently.
At the front door, we saw fire spewing from Miss Maudies
diningroom windows. As if to confirm what we saw, the town fire siren
wailed up the scale to a treble pitch and remained there, screaming.
Its gone, aint it? moaned Jem.
I expect so, said Atticus. Now listen, both of you. Go down and
stand in front of the Radley Place. Keep out of the way, do you hear?
See which way the winds blowing?
Oh, said Jem. Atticus, reckon we oughta start moving the
furniture out?
Not yet, son. Do as I tell you. Run now. Take care of Scout, you
hear? Dont let her out of your sight.
With a push, Atticus started us toward the Radley front gate. We
stood watching the street fill with men and cars while fire silently
devoured Miss Maudies house. Why dont they hurry, why dont they
hurry... muttered Jem.
We saw why. The old fire truck, killed by the cold, was being
pushed from town by a crowd of men. When the men attached its hose
to a hydrant, the hose burst and water shot up, tinkling down on the
pavement.
Oh-h Lord, Jem...
Jem put his arm around me. Hush, Scout, he said. It aint time to
worry yet. Ill let you know when.
The men of Maycomb, in all degrees of dress and undress, took
furniture from Miss Maudies house to a yard across the street. I saw
Atticus carrying Miss Maudies heavy oak rocking chair, and thought it
sensible of him to save what she valued most.
Sometimes we heard shouts. Then Mr. Averys face appeared in an
upstairs window. He pushed a mattress out the window into the street
and threw down furniture until men shouted, Come down from there,
Dick! The stairs are going! Get outta there, Mr. Avery!
Mr. Avery began climbing through the window.
Scout, hes stuck... breathed Jem. Oh God...
Mr. Avery was wedged tightly. I buried my head under Jems arm
and didnt look again until Jem cried, Hes got loose, Scout! Hes all
right!
I looked up to see Mr. Avery cross the upstairs porch. He swung his
legs over the railing and was sliding down a pillar when he slipped. He
fell, yelled, and hit Miss Maudies shrubbery.
Suddenly I noticed that the men were backing away from Miss
Maudies house, moving down the street toward us. They were no
longer carrying furniture. The fire was well into the second floor and
had eaten its way to the roof: window frames were black against a vivid
orange center.
Jem, it looks like a pumpkin
Scout, look!
Smoke was rolling off our house and Miss Rachels house like fog
off a riverbank, and men were pulling hoses toward them. Behind us,
the fire truck from Abbottsville screamed around the curve and
stopped in front of our house.
That book... I said.
What? said Jem.
That Tom Swift book, it aint mine, its Dills...
Dont worry, Scout, it aint time to worry yet, said Jem. He
pointed. Looka yonder.
In a group of neighbors, Atticus was standing with his hands in his
overcoat pockets. He might have been watching a football game. Miss
Maudie was beside him.
See there, hes not worried yet, said Jem.
Why aint he on top of one of the houses?
Hes too old, hed break his neck.
You think we oughta make him get our stuff out?
Lets dont pester him, hell know when its time, said Jem.
The Abbottsville fire truck began pumping water on our house; a
man on the roof pointed to places that needed it most. I watched our
Absolute Morphodite go black and crumble; Miss Maudies sunhat
settled on top of the heap. I could not see her hedge-clippers. In the
heat between our house, Miss Rachels and Miss Maudies, the men had
long ago shed coats and bathrobes. They worked in pajama tops and
nightshirts stuffed into their pants, but I became aware that I was
slowly freezing where I stood. Jem tried to keep me warm, but his arm
was not enough. I pulled free of it and clutched my shoulders. By
dancing a little, I could feel my feet.
Another fire truck appeared and stopped in front of Miss Stephanie
Crawfords. There was no hydrant for another hose, and the men tried
to soak her house with hand extinguishers.
Miss Maudies tin roof quelled the flames. Roaring, the house
collapsed; fire gushed everywhere, followed by a flurry of blankets from
men on top of the adjacent houses, beating out sparks and burning
chunks of wood.
It was dawn before the men began to leave, first one by one, then in
groups. They pushed the Maycomb fire truck back to town, the
Abbottsville truck departed, the third one remained. We found out next
day it had come from Clarks Ferry, sixty miles away.
Jem and I slid across the street. Miss Maudie was staring at the
smoking black hole in her yard, and Atticus shook his head to tell us
she did not want to talk. He led us home, holding onto our shoulders to
cross the icy street. He said Miss Maudie would stay with Miss
Stephanie for the time being.
Anybody want some hot chocolate? he asked. I shuddered when
Atticus started a fire in the kitchen stove.
As we drank our cocoa I noticed Atticus looking at me, first with
curiosity, then with sternness. I thought I told you and Jem to stay
put, he said.
Why, we did. We stayed
Then whose blanket is that?
Blanket?
Yes maam, blanket. It isnt ours.
I looked down and found myself clutching a brown woolen blanket
I was wearing around my shoulders, squaw-fashion.
Atticus, I dont know, sir... I
I turned to Jem for an answer, but Jem was even more bewildered
than I. He said he didnt know how it got there, we did exactly as
Atticus had told us, we stood down by the Radley gate away from
everybody, we didnt move an inchJem stopped.
Mr. Nathan was at the fire, he babbled, I saw him, I saw him, he
was tuggin that mattressAtticus, I swear...
Thats all right, son. Atticus grinned slowly. Looks like all of
Maycomb was out tonight, in one way or another. Jem, theres some
wrapping paper in the pantry, I think. Go get it and well
Atticus, no sir!
Jem seemed to have lost his mind. He began pouring out our
secrets right and left in total disregard for my safety if not for his own,
omitting nothing, knot-hole, pants and all.
...Mr. Nathan put cement in that tree, Atticus, anhe did it to stop
us findin thingshes crazy, I reckon, like they say, but Atticus, I swear
to God he aint ever harmed us, he aint ever hurt us, he coulda cut my
throat from ear to ear that night but he tried to mend my pants
instead... he aint ever hurt us, Atticus
Atticus said, Whoa, son, so gently that I was greatly heartened. It
was obvious that he had not followed a word Jem said, for all Atticus
said was, Youre right. Wed better keep this and the blanket to
ourselves. Someday, maybe, Scout can thank him for covering her up.
Thank who? I asked.
Boo Radley. You were so busy looking at the fire you didnt know it
when he put the blanket around you.
My stomach turned to water and I nearly threw up when Jem held
out the blanket and crept toward me. He sneaked out of the house
turn roundsneaked up, an went like this!
Atticus said dryly, Do not let this inspire you to further glory,
Jeremy.
Jem scowled, I aint gonna do anything to him,but I watched the
spark of fresh adventure leave his eyes. Just think, Scout, he said, if
youd just turned around, youda seen him.
Calpurnia woke us at noon. Atticus had said we need not go to
school that day, wed learn nothing after no sleep. Calpurnia said for us
to try and clean up the front yard.
Miss Maudies sunhat was suspended in a thin layer of ice, like a fly
in amber, and we had to dig under the dirt for her hedge-clippers. We
found her in her back yard, gazing at her frozen charred azaleas.
Were bringing back your things, Miss Maudie, said Jem. Were
awful sorry.
Miss Maudie looked around, and the shadow of her old grin
crossed her face. Always wanted a smaller house, Jem Finch. Gives me
more yard. Just think, Ill have more room for my azaleas now!
You aint grievin, Miss Maudie? I asked, surprised. Atticus said
her house was nearly all she had.
Grieving, child? Why, I hated that old cow barn. Thought of settin
fire to it a hundred times myself, except theyd lock me up.
But
Dont you worry about me, Jean Louise Finch. There are ways of
doing things you dont know about. Why, Ill build me a little house and
take me a couple of roomers andgracious, Ill have the finest yard in
Alabama. Those Bellingrathsll look plain puny when I get started!
Jem and I looked at each other. Howd it catch, Miss Maudie? he
asked.
I dont know, Jem. Probably the flue in the kitchen. I kept a fire in
there last night for my potted plants. Hear you had some unexpected
company last night, Miss Jean Louise.
Howd you know?
Atticus told me on his way to town this morning. Tell you the
truth, Id like tove been with you. And Idve had sense enough to turn
around, too.
Miss Maudie puzzled me. With most of her possessions gone and
her beloved yard a shambles, she still took a lively and cordial interest
in Jems and my affairs.
She must have seen my perplexity. She said, Only thing I worried
about last night was all the danger and commotion it caused. This
whole neighborhood could have gone up. Mr. Averyll be in bed for a
weekhes right stove up. Hes too old to do things like that and I told
him so. Soon as I can get my hands clean and when Stephanie
Crawfords not looking, Ill make him a Lane cake. That Stephanies
been after my recipe for thirty years, and if she thinks Ill give it to her
just because Im staying with her shes got another think coming.
I reflected that if Miss Maudie broke down and gave it to her, Miss
Stephanie couldnt follow it anyway. Miss Maudie had once let me see
it: among other things, the recipe called for one large cup of sugar.
It was a still day. The air was so cold and clear we heard the
courthouse clock clank, rattle and strain before it struck the hour. Miss
Maudies nose was a color I had never seen before, and I inquired
about it.
Ive been out here since six oclock, she said. Should be frozen by
now.She held up her hands. A network of tiny lines crisscrossed her
palms, brown with dirt and dried blood.
Youve ruined em, said Jem. Why dont you get a colored man?
There was no note of sacrifice in his voice when he added, Or
Scoutnme, we can help you.
Miss Maudie said, Thank you sir, but youve got a job of your own
over there. She pointed to our yard.
You mean the Morphodite? I asked. Shoot, we can rake him up
in a jiffy.
Miss Maudie stared down at me, her lips moving silently. Suddenly
she put her hands to her head and whooped. When we left her, she was
still chuckling.
Jem said he didnt know what was the matter with herthat was
just Miss Maudie.
9
You can just take that back, boy!
This order, given by me to Cecil Jacobs, was the beginning of a
rather thin time for Jem and me. My fists were clenched and I was
ready to let fly. Atticus had promised me he would wear me out if he
ever heard of me fighting any more; I was far too old and too big for
such childish things, and the sooner I learned to hold in, the better off
everybody would be. I soon forgot.
Cecil Jacobs made me forget. He had announced in the schoolyard
the day before that Scout Finchs daddy defended niggers. I denied it,
but told Jem.
Whatd he mean sayin that? I asked.
Nothing, Jem said. Ask Atticus, hell tell you.
Do you defend niggers, Atticus? I asked him that evening.
Of course I do. Dont say nigger, Scout. Thats common.
s what everybody at school says.
From now on itll be everybody less one
Well if you dont want me to grow up talkin that way, why do you
send me to school?
My father looked at me mildly, amusement in his eyes. Despite our
compromise, my campaign to avoid school had continued in one form
or another since my first days dose of it: the beginning of last
September had brought on sinking spells, dizziness, and mild gastric
complaints. I went so far as to pay a nickel for the privilege of rubbing
my head against the head of Miss Rachels cooks son, who was afflicted
with a tremendous ringworm. It didnt take.
But I was worrying another bone. Do all lawyers defend n-
Negroes, Atticus?
Of course they do, Scout.
Then why did Cecil say you defended niggers? He made it sound
like you were runnin a still.
Atticus sighed. Im simply defending a Negrohis names Tom
Robinson. He lives in that little settlement beyond the town dump.
Hes a member of Calpurnias church, and Cal knows his family well.
She says theyre clean-living folks. Scout, you arent old enough to
understand some things yet, but theres been some high talk around
town to the effect that I shouldnt do much about defending this man.
Its a peculiar caseit wont come to trial until summer session. John
Taylor was kind enough to give us a postponement...
If you shouldnt be defendin him, then why are you doin it?
For a number of reasons, said Atticus. The main one is, if I didnt
I couldnt hold up my head in town, I couldnt represent this county in
the legislature, I couldnt even tell you or Jem not to do something
again.
You mean if you didnt defend that man, Jem and me wouldnt
have to mind you any more?
Thats about right.
Why?
Because I could never ask you to mind me again. Scout, simply by
the nature of the work, every lawyer gets at least one case in his lifetime
that affects him personally. This ones mine, I guess. You might hear
some ugly talk about it at school, but do one thing for me if you will:
you just hold your head high and keep those fists down. No matter
what anybody says to you, dont you let em get your goat. Try fighting
with your head for a change... its a good one, even if it does resist
learning.
Atticus, are we going to win it?
No, honey.
Then why
Simply because we were licked a hundred years before we started
is no reason for us not to try to win, Atticus said.
You sound like Cousin Ike Finch,I said. Cousin Ike Finch was
Maycomb Countys sole surviving Confederate veteran. He wore a
General Hood type beard of which he was inordinately vain. At least
once a year Atticus, Jem and I called on him, and I would have to kiss
him. It was horrible. Jem and I would listen respectfully to Atticus and
Cousin Ike rehash the war. Tell you, Atticus,Cousin Ike would say,
the Missouri Compromise was what licked us, but if I had to go
through it agin Id walk every step of the way there an every step back
jist like I did before an furthermore wed whip em this time... now in
1864, when Stonewall Jackson came around byI beg your pardon,
young folks. OlBlue Light was in heaven then, God rest his saintly
brow....
Come here, Scout,said Atticus. I crawled into his lap and tucked
my head under his chin. He put his arms around me and rocked me
gently. Its different this time, he said. This time we arent fighting
the Yankees, were fighting our friends. But remember this, no matter
how bitter things get, theyre still our friends and this is still our home.
With this in mind, I faced Cecil Jacobs in the schoolyard next day:
You gonna take that back, boy?
You gotta make me first! he yelled. My folks said your daddy was
a disgrace an that nigger oughta hang from the water-tank!
I drew a bead on him, remembered what Atticus had said, then
dropped my fists and walked away, Scouts a cowward! ringing in
my ears. It was the first time I ever walked away from a fight.
Somehow, if I fought Cecil I would let Atticus down. Atticus so
rarely asked Jem and me to do something for him, I could take being
called a coward for him. I felt extremely noble for having remembered,
and remained noble for three weeks. Then Christmas came and
disaster struck.
Jem and I viewed Christmas with mixed feelings. The good side
was the tree and Uncle Jack Finch. Every Christmas Eve day we met
Uncle Jack at Maycomb Junction, and he would spend a week with us.
A flip of the coin revealed the uncompromising lineaments of Aunt
Alexandra and Francis.
I suppose I should include Uncle Jimmy, Aunt Alexandras
husband,but as he never spoke a word to me in my life except to say,
Get off the fence,once, I never saw any reason to take notice of him.
Neither did Aunt Alexandra. Long ago, in a burst of friendliness, Aunty
and Uncle Jimmy produced a son named Henry, who left home as soon
as was humanly possible, married, and produced Francis. Henry and
his wife deposited Francis at his grandparents every Christmas, then
pursued their own pleasures.
No amount of sighing could induce Atticus to let us spend
Christmas day at home. We went to Finchs Landing every Christmas in
my memory. The fact that Aunty was a good cook was some
compensation for being forced to spend a religious holiday with
Francis Hancock. He was a year older than I, and I avoided him on
principle: he enjoyed everything I disapproved of, and disliked my
ingenuous diversions.
Aunt Alexandra was Atticuss sister, but when Jem told me about
changelings and siblings, I decided that she had been swapped at birth,
that my grandparents had perhaps received a Crawford instead of a
Finch. Had I ever harbored the mystical notions about mountains that
seem to obsess lawyers and judges, Aunt Alexandra would have been
analogous to Mount Everest: throughout my early life, she was cold
and there.
When Uncle Jack jumped down from the train Christmas Eve day,
we had to wait for the porter to hand him two long packages. Jem and I
always thought it funny when Uncle Jack pecked Atticus on the cheek;
they were the only two men we ever saw kiss each other. Uncle Jack
shook hands with Jem and swung me high, but not high enough: Uncle
Jack was a head shorter than Atticus; the baby of the family, he was
younger than Aunt Alexandra. He and Aunty looked alike, but Uncle
Jack made better use of his face: we were never wary of his sharp nose
and chin.
He was one of the few men of science who never terrified me,
probably because he never behaved like a doctor. Whenever he
performed a minor service for Jem and me, as removing a splinter
from a foot, he would tell us exactly what he was going to do, give us an
estimation of how much it would hurt, and explain the use of any tongs
he employed. One Christmas I lurked in corners nursing a twisted
splinter in my foot, permitting no one to come near me. When Uncle
Jack caught me, he kept me laughing about a preacher who hated going
to church so much that every day he stood at his gate in his dressinggown,
smoking a hookah and delivering five-minute sermons to any
passers-by who desired spiritual comfort. I interrupted to make Uncle
Jack let me know when he would pull it out, but he held up a bloody
splinter in a pair of tweezers and said he yanked it while I was
laughing, that was what was known as relativity.
Whats in those packages?I asked him, pointing to the long thin
parcels the porter had given him.
None of your business, he said.
Jem said, Hows Rose Aylmer?
Rose Aylmer was Uncle Jacks cat. She was a beautiful yellow
female Uncle Jack said was one of the few women he could stand
permanently. He reached into his coat pocket and brought out some
snapshots. We admired them.
Shes gettin fat, I said.
I should think so. She eats all the leftover fingers and ears from
the hospital.
Aw, thats a damn story, I said.
I beg your pardon?
Atticus said, Dont pay any attention to her, Jack. Shes trying you
out. Cal says shes been cussing fluently for a week, now.
Uncle Jack raised his eyebrows and said nothing. I was proceeding
on the dim theory, aside from the innate attractiveness of such words,
that if Atticus discovered I had picked them up at school he wouldnt
make me go.
But at supper that evening when I asked him to pass the damn
ham, please, Uncle Jack pointed at me. See me afterwards, young
lady, he said.
When supper was over, Uncle Jack went to the livingroom and sat
down. He slapped his thighs for me to come sit on his lap. I liked to
smell him: he was like a bottle of alcohol and something pleasantly
sweet. He pushed back my bangs and looked at me. Youre more like
Atticus than your mother, he said. Youre also growing out of your
pants a little.
I reckon they fit all right.
You like words like damn and hell now, dont you?
I said I reckoned so.
Well I dont, said Uncle Jack, not unless theres extreme
provocation connected with em. Ill be here a week, and I dont want to
hear any words like that while Im here. Scout, youll get in trouble if
you go around saying things like that. You want to grow up to be a lady,
dont you?
I said not particularly.
Of course you do. Now lets get to the tree.
We decorated the tree until bedtime, and that night I dreamed of
the two long packages for Jem and me. Next morning Jem and I dived
for them: they were from Atticus, who had written Uncle Jack to get
them for us, and they were what we had asked for.
Dont point them in the house, said Atticus, when Jem aimed at a
picture on the wall.
Youll have to teach em to shoot, said Uncle Jack.
Thats your job, said Atticus. I merely bowed to the inevitable.
It took Atticuss courtroom voice to drag us away from the tree. He
declined to let us take our air rifles to the Landing (I had already begun
to think of shooting Francis) and said if we made one false move hed
take them away from us for good.
Finchs Landing consisted of three hundred and sixty-six steps
down a high bluff and ending in a jetty. Farther down stream, beyond
the bluff, were traces of an old cotton landing, where Finch Negroes
had loaded bales and produce, unloaded blocks of ice, flour and sugar,
farm equipment, and feminine apparel. A two-rut road ran from the
riverside and vanished among dark trees. At the end of the road was a
two-storied white house with porches circling it upstairs and
downstairs. In his old age, our ancestor Simon Finch had built it to
please his nagging wife; but with the porches all resemblance to
ordinary houses of its era ended. The internal arrangements of the
Finch house were indicative of Simons guilelessness and the absolute
trust with which he regarded his offspring.
There were six bedrooms upstairs, four for the eight female
children, one for Welcome Finch, the sole son, and one for visiting
relatives. Simple enough; but the daughters rooms could be reached
only by one staircase, Welcomes room and the guestroom only by
another. The DaughtersStaircase was in the ground-floor bedroom of
their parents, so Simon always knew the hours of his daughters
nocturnal comings and goings.
There was a kitchen separate from the rest of the house, tacked
onto it by a wooden catwalk; in the back yard was a rusty bell on a pole,
used to summon field hands or as a distress signal; a widows walk was
on the roof, but no widows walked therefrom it, Simon oversaw his
overseer, watched the river-boats, and gazed into the lives of
surrounding landholders.
There went with the house the usual legend about the Yankees: one
Finch female, recently engaged, donned her complete trousseau to save
it from raiders in the neighborhood; she became stuck in the door to
the Daughters Staircase but was doused with water and finally pushed
through. When we arrived at the Landing, Aunt Alexandra kissed Uncle
Jack, Francis kissed Uncle Jack, Uncle Jimmy shook hands silently
with Uncle Jack, Jem and I gave our presents to Francis, who gave us a
present. Jem felt his age and gravitated to the adults, leaving me to
entertain our cousin. Francis was eight and slicked back his hair.
Whatd you get for Christmas? I asked politely.
Just what I asked for,he said. Francis had requested a pair of
knee-pants, a red leather booksack, five shirts and an untied bow tie.
Thats nice, I lied. Jem and me got air rifles, and Jem got a
chemistry set
A toy one, I reckon.
No, a real one. Hes gonna make me some invisible ink, and Im
gonna write to Dill in it.
Francis asked what was the use of that.
Well, cant you just see his face when he gets a letter from me with
nothing in it? Itll drive him nuts.
Talking to Francis gave me the sensation of settling slowly to the
bottom of the ocean. He was the most boring child I ever met. As he
lived in Mobile, he could not inform on me to school authorities, but he
managed to tell everything he knew to Aunt Alexandra, who in turn
unburdened herself to Atticus, who either forgot it or gave me hell,
whichever struck his fancy. But the only time I ever heard Atticus speak
sharply to anyone was when I once heard him say, Sister, I do the best
I can with them!It had something to do with my going around in
overalls.
Aunt Alexandra was fanatical on the subject of my attire. I could
not possibly hope to be a lady if I wore breeches; when I said I could do
nothing in a dress, she said I wasnt supposed to be doing things that
required pants. Aunt Alexandras vision of my deportment involved
playing with small stoves, tea sets, and wearing the Add-A-Pearl
necklace she gave me when I was born; furthermore, I should be a ray
of sunshine in my fathers lonely life. I suggested that one could be a
ray of sunshine in pants just as well, but Aunty said that one had to
behave like a sunbeam, that I was born good but had grown
progressively worse every year. She hurt my feelings and set my teeth
permanently on edge, but when I asked Atticus about it, he said there
were already enough sunbeams in the family and to go on about my
business, he didnt mind me much the way I was.
At Christmas dinner, I sat at the little table in the diningroom; Jem
and Francis sat with the adults at the dining table. Aunty had
continued to isolate me long after Jem and Francis graduated to the big
table. I often wondered what she thought Id do, get up and throw
something? I sometimes thought of asking her if she would let me sit at
the big table with the rest of them just once, I would prove to her how
civilized I could be; after all, I ate at home every day with no major
mishaps. When I begged Atticus to use his influence, he said he had
nonewe were guests, and we sat where she told us to sit. He also said
Aunt Alexandra didnt understand girls much, shed never had one.
But her cooking made up for everything: three kinds of meat,
summer vegetables from her pantry shelves; peach pickles, two kinds
of cake and ambrosia constituted a modest Christmas dinner.
Afterwards, the adults made for the livingroom and sat around in a
dazed condition. Jem lay on the floor, and I went to the back yard. Put
on your coat, said Atticus dreamily, so I didnt hear him.
Francis sat beside me on the back steps. That was the best yet, I
said.
Grandmas a wonderful cook, said Francis. Shes gonna teach me
how.
Boys dont cook. I giggled at the thought of Jem in an apron.
Grandma saysall men should learn to cook, that men oughta be
careful with their wives and wait on em when they dont feel good,
said my cousin.
I dont want Dill waitin on me, I said. Id rather wait on him.
Dill?
Yeah. Dont say anything about it yet, but were gonna get married
as soon as were big enough. He asked me last summer.
Francis hooted.
Whats the matter with him? I asked. Aint anything the matter
with him.
You mean that little runt Grandma says stays with Miss Rachel
every summer?
Thats exactly who I mean.
I know all about him, said Francis.
What about him?
Grandma says he hasnt got a home
Has too, he lives in Meridian.
-he just gets passed around from relative to relative, and Miss
Rachel keeps him every summer.
Francis, thats not so!
Francis grinned at me. Youre mighty dumb sometimes, Jean
Louise. Guess you dont know any better, though.
What do you mean?
If Uncle Atticus lets you run around with stray dogs, thats his own
business, like Grandma says, so it aint your fault. I guess it aint your
fault if Uncle Atticus is a nigger-lover besides, but Im here to tell you it
certainly does mortify the rest of the family
Francis, what the hell do you mean?
Just what I said. Grandma says its bad enough he lets you all run
wild, but now hes turned out a nigger-lover well never be able to walk
the streets of Maycomb agin. Hes ruinin the family, thats what hes
doin.
Francis rose and sprinted down the catwalk to the old kitchen. At a
safe distance he called, Hes nothin but a nigger-lover!
He is not! I roared. I dont know what youre talkin about, but
you better cut it out this red hot minute!
I leaped off the steps and ran down the catwalk. It was easy to
collar Francis. I said take it back quick.
Francis jerked loose and sped into the old kitchen. Nigger-lover!
he yelled.
When stalking ones prey, it is best to take ones time. Say nothing,
and as sure as eggs he will become curious and emerge. Francis
appeared at the kitchen door. You still mad, Jean Louise? he asked
tentatively.
Nothing to speak of, I said.
Francis came out on the catwalk.
You gonna take it back, Fraancis?But I was too quick on the
draw. Francis shot back into the kitchen, so I retired to the steps. I
could wait patiently. I had sat there perhaps five minutes when I heard
Aunt Alexandra speak: Wheres Francis?
Hes out yonder in the kitchen.
He knows hes not supposed to play in there.
Francis came to the door and yelled, Grandma, shes got me in
here and she wont let me out!
What is all this, Jean Louise?
I looked up at Aunt Alexandra. I havent got him in there, Aunty, I
aint holdin him.
Yes she is, shouted Francis, she wont let me out!
Have you all been fussing?
Jean Louise got mad at me, Grandma, called Francis.
Francis, come out of there! Jean Louise, if I hear another word out
of you Ill tell your father. Did I hear you say hell a while ago?
Nome.
I thought I did. Id better not hear it again.
Aunt Alexandra was a back-porch listener. The moment she was
out of sight Francis came out head up and grinning. Dont you fool
with me, he said.
He jumped into the yard and kept his distance, kicking tufts of
grass, turning around occasionally to smile at me. Jem appeared on the
porch, looked at us,and went away. Francis climbed the mimosa tree,
came down, put his hands in his pockets and strolled around the yard.
Hah! he said. I asked him who he thought he was, Uncle Jack?
Francis said he reckoned I got told, for me to just sit there and leave
him alone.
I aint botherin you, I said.
Francis looked at me carefully, concluded that I had been
sufficiently subdued, and crooned softly, Nigger-lover...
This time, I split my knuckle to the bone on his front teeth. My left
impaired, I sailed in withmy right, but not for long. Uncle Jack pinned
my arms to my sides and said, Stand still!
Aunt Alexandra ministered to Francis, wiping his tears away with
her handkerchief, rubbing his hair, patting his cheek. Atticus, Jem, and
Uncle Jimmy had come to the back porch when Francis started yelling.
Who started this? said Uncle Jack.
Francis and I pointed at each other. Grandma, he bawled, she
called me a whore-lady and jumped on me!
Is that true, Scout? said Uncle Jack.
I reckon so.
When Uncle Jacklooked down at me, his features were like Aunt
Alexandras. You know I told you youd get in trouble if you used
words like that? I told you, didnt I?
Yes sir, but
Well, youre in trouble now. Stay there.
I was debating whether to stand there or run, and tarried in
indecision a moment too long: I turned to flee but Uncle Jack was
quicker. I found myself suddenly looking at a tiny ant struggling with a
bread crumb in the grass.
Ill never speak to you again as long as I live! I hate you an despise
you an hope you die tomorrow! A statement that seemed to encourage
Uncle Jack, more than anything. I ran to Atticus for comfort, but he
said I had it coming and it was high time we went home. I climbed into
the back seat of the car without saying good-bye to anyone, and at
home I ran to my room and slammed the door. Jem tried to say
something nice, but I wouldnt let him.
When I surveyed the damage there were only seven or eight red
marks, and I was reflecting upon relativity when someone knocked on
the door. I asked who it was; Uncle Jack answered.
Go away!
Uncle Jack said if I talked like that hed lick me again, so I was
quiet. When he entered the room I retreated to a corner and turned my
back on him. Scout, he said, do you still hate me?
Go on, please sir.
Why, I didnt think youd hold it against me, he said. Im
disappointed in youyou had that coming and you know it.
Didnt either.
Honey, you cant go around calling people
You aint fair, I said, you aint fair.
Uncle Jacks eyebrows went up. Not fair? How not?
Youre real nice, Uncle Jack, an I reckon I love you even after
what you did, but you dont understand children much.
Uncle Jack put his hands on his hips and looked down at me. And
why do I not understand children, Miss Jean Louise? Such conduct as
yours required little understanding. It was obstreperous, disorderly
and abusive
You gonna give me a chance to tell you? I dont mean to sass you,
Im just tryin to tell you.
Uncle Jack sat down on the bed. His eyebrows came together, and
he peered up at me from under them. Proceed, he said.
I took a deep breath. Well, in the first place you never stopped to
gimme a chance to tell you my side of ityou just lit right into me.
When Jem an I fuss Atticus doesnt ever just listen to Jems side of it,
he hears mine too, anin the second place you told me never to use
words like that except in ex-extreme provocation, and Francis
provocated me enough to knock his block off
Uncle Jack scratched his head. What was your side of it, Scout?
Francis called Atticus somethin, an I wasnt about to take it off
him.
What did Francis call him?
A nigger-lover. I aint very sure what it means, but the way Francis
said ittell you one thing right now, Uncle Jack, Ill be-I swear before
God if Ill sit there and let him say somethin about Atticus.
He called Atticus that?
Yes sir, he did, an a lot more. Said Atticusd be the ruination of the
family an he let Jem an me run wild....
From the look on Uncle Jacks face, I thought I was in for it again.
When he said, Well see about this,I knew Francis was in for it. Ive
a good mind to go out there tonight.
Please sir, just let it go. Please.
Ive no intention of letting it go, he said. Alexandra should know
about this. The idea ofwaitll I get my hands on that boy....
Uncle Jack, please promise me somethin, please sir. Promise you
wont tell Atticus about this. Hehe asked me one time not to let
anything I heard about him make me mad, an Id ruther him think we
were fightin about somethin else instead. Please promise...
But I dont like Francis getting away with something like that
He didnt. You reckon you could tie up my hand? Its still bleedin
some.
Of course I will, baby. I know of no hand I would be more
delighted to tie up. Will you come this way?
Uncle Jack gallantly bowed me to the bathroom. While he cleaned
and bandaged my knuckles, he entertained me with a tale about a
funny nearsighted old gentleman who had a cat named Hodge, and
who counted all the cracks in the sidewalk when he went to town.
There now, he said. Youll have a very unladylike scar on your
wedding-ring finger.
Thank you sir. Uncle Jack?
Maam?
Whats a whore-lady?
Uncle Jack plunged into another long tale about an old Prime
Minister who sat in the House of Commons and blew feathers in the air
and tried to keep them there when all about him men were losing their
heads. I guess he was trying to answer my question, but he made no
sense whatsoever.
Later, when I was supposed to be in bed, I went down the hall for a
drink of water and heard Atticus and Uncle Jack in the livingroom:
I shall never marry, Atticus.
Why?
I might have children.
Atticus said, Youve a lot to learn, Jack.
I know. Your daughter gave me myfirst lessons this afternoon.
She said I didnt understand children much and told me why. She was
quite right. Atticus, she told me how I should have treated heroh
dear, Im so sorry I romped on her.
Atticus chuckled. She earned it, so dont feel too remorseful.
I waited, on tenterhooks, for Uncle Jack to tell Atticus my side of it.
But he didnt. He simply murmured, Her use of bathroom invective
leaves nothing to the imagination. But she doesnt know the meaning of
half she saysshe asked me what a whore-lady was...
Did you tell her?
No, I told her about Lord Melbourne.
Jack! When a child asks you something, answer him, for goodness
sake. But dont make a production of it. Children are children, but they
can spot an evasion quicker than adults,and evasion simply muddles
em. No, my father mused, you had the right answer this afternoon,
but the wrong reasons. Bad language is a stage all children go through,
and it dies with time when they learn theyre not attracting attention
with it. Hotheadedness isnt. Scouts got to learn to keep her head and
learn soon, with whats in store for her these next few months. Shes
coming along, though. Jems getting older and she follows his example
a good bit now. All she needs is assistance sometimes.
Atticus, youve never laid a hand on her.
I admit that. So far Ive been able to get by with threats. Jack, she
minds me as well as she can. Doesnt come up to scratch half the time,
but she tries.
Thats not the answer, said Uncle Jack.
No, the answer is she knows I know she tries. Thats what makes
the difference. What bothers me is that she and Jem will have to absorb
some ugly things pretty soon. Im not worried about Jem keeping his
head, but Scoutd just as soon jump on someone as look at him if her
prides at stake....
I waited for Uncle Jack to break his promise. He still didnt.
Atticus, how bad is this going to be? You havent had too much
chance to discuss it.
It couldnt be worse, Jack. The only thing weve got is a black
mans word against the Ewells. The evidence boils down to you-did-Ididnt.
The jury couldnt possibly be expected to take Tom Robinsons
word against the Ewellsare you acquainted with the Ewells?
Uncle Jack said yes, he remembered them. He described them to
Atticus, but Atticus said, Youre a generation off. The present ones are
the same, though.
What are you going to do, then?
Before Im through, I intend to jar the jury a bitI think well have
a reasonable chance on appeal, though. I really cant tell at this stage,
Jack. You know, Id hoped to get through life without a case of this
kind, but John Taylor pointed at me and said, Youre It.
Let this cup pass from you, eh?
Right. But do you think I could face my children otherwise? You
know whats going to happen as well as I do, Jack, and I hope and pray
I can get Jem and Scout through it without bitterness, and most of all,
without catching Maycombs usual disease. Why reasonable people go
stark raving mad when anything involving a Negro comes up, is
something I dont pretend to understand... I just hope that Jem and
Scout come to me for their answers instead of listening to the town. I
hope they trust me enough.... Jean Louise?
My scalp jumped. I stuck my head around the corner. Sir?
Go to bed.
I scurried to my room and went to bed. Uncle Jack was a prince of a
fellow not to let me down. But I never figured out how Atticus knew I
was listening, and it was not until many years later that I realized he
wanted me to hear every word he said.
10
Atticus was feeble: he was nearly fifty. When Jem and I asked him
why he was so old, he said he got started late, which we felt reflected
upon his abilities and manliness. He was much older than the parents
of our school contemporaries, and there was nothing Jem or I could say
about him when our classmates said, My father
Jem was football crazy. Atticus was never too tired to play keepaway,
but when Jem wanted to tackle him Atticus would say, Im too
old for that, son.
Our father didnt do anything. He worked in an office, not in a
drugstore. Atticus did not drive a dump-truck for the county, he was
not the sheriff, he did not farm, work in a garage, or do anything that
could possibly arouse the admiration of anyone.
Besides that, he wore glasses. He was nearly blind in his left eye,
and said left eyes were the tribal curse of the Finches. Whenever he
wanted to see something well, he turned his head and looked from his
right eye.
He did not do the things our schoolmates fathers did: he never
went hunting, he did not play poker or fish or drink or smoke. He sat in
the livingroom and read.
With these attributes, however, he would not remain as
inconspicuous as we wished him to: that year, the school buzzed with
talk about him defending Tom Robinson, none of which was
complimentary. After my bout with Cecil Jacobs when I committed
myself to a policy of cowardice, word got around that Scout Finch
wouldnt fight any more, her daddy wouldnt let her. This was not
entirely correct: I wouldnt fight publicly for Atticus, but the family was
private ground. I would fight anyone from a third cousin upwards tooth
and nail. Francis Hancock, for example, knew that.
When he gave us our air-rifles Atticus wouldnt teach us to shoot.
Uncle Jack instructed us in the rudiments thereof; he said Atticus
wasnt interested in guns. Atticus said to Jem one day, Id rather you
shot at tin cans in the back yard, but I know youll go after birds. Shoot
all the bluejays you want, if you can hit em, but remember its a sin to
kill a mockingbird.
That was the only time I ever heard Atticus say it was a sin to do
something, and I asked Miss Maudie about it.
Your fathers right, she said. Mockingbirds dont do one thing
but make music for us to enjoy. They dont eat up peoples gardens,
dont nest in corncribs, they dont do one thing but sing their hearts out
for us. Thats why its a sin to kill a mockingbird.
Miss Maudie, this is an old neighborhood, aint it?
Been here longer than the town.
Nome, I mean the folks on our street are all old. Jem and mes the
only children around here. Mrs. Dubose is close on to a hundred and
Miss Rachels old and so are you and Atticus.
I dont call fifty very old, said Miss Maudie tartly. Not being
wheeled around yet, am I? Neithers your father. But I must say
Providence was kind enough to burn down that old mausoleum of
mine, Im too old to keep it upmaybe youre right, Jean Louise, this is
a settled neighborhood. Youve never been around young folks much,
have you?
Yessum, at school.
I mean young grown-ups. Youre lucky, you know. You and Jem
have the benefit of your fathers age. If your father was thirty youd find
life quite different.
I sure would. Atticus cant do anything....
Youd be surprised, said Miss Maudie. Theres life in him yet.
What can he do?
Well, he can make somebodys will so airtight cant anybody
meddle with it.
Shoot...
Well, did you know hes the best checker-player in this town?
Why, down at the Landing when we were coming up, Atticus Finch
could beat everybody on both sides of the river.
Good Lord, Miss Maudie, Jem and me beat him all the time.
Its about time you found out its because he lets you. Did you
know he can play a Jews Harp?
This modest accomplishment served to make me even more
ashamed of him.
Well... she said.
Well, what, Miss Maudie?
Well nothing. Nothingit seems with all that youd be proud of
him. Cant everybody play a Jews Harp. Now keep out of the way of the
carpenters. Youd better go home, Ill be in my azaleas and cant watch
you. Plank might hit you.
I went to the back yard and found Jem plugging away at a tin can,
which seemed stupid with all the bluejays around. I returned to the
front yard and busied myself for two hours erecting a complicated
breastworks at the side of the porch, consisting of a tire, an orange
crate, the laundry hamper, the porch chairs, and a small U.S. flag Jem
gave me from a popcorn box.
When Atticus came home to dinner he found me crouched down
aiming across the street. What are you shooting at?
Miss Maudies rear end.
Atticus turned and saw my generous target bending over her
bushes. He pushed his hat to the back of his head and crossed the
street. Maudie, he called, I thought Id better warn you. Youre in
considerable peril.
Miss Maudie straightened up and looked toward me. She said,
Atticus, you are a devil from hell.
When Atticus returned he told me to break camp. Dont you ever
let me catch you pointing that gun at anybody again, he said.
I wished my father was a devil from hell. Isounded out Calpurnia
on the subject. Mr. Finch? Why, he can do lots of things.
Like what? I asked.
Calpurnia scratched her head. Well, I dont rightly know, she
said.
Jem underlined it when he asked Atticus if he was going out for the
Methodists and Atticus said hed break his neck if he did, he was just
too old for that sort of thing. The Methodists were trying to pay off
their church mortgage, and had challenged the Baptists to a game of
touch football. Everybody in towns father was playing, it seemed,
except Atticus. Jem said he didnt even want to go, but he was unable to
resist football in any form, and he stood gloomily on the sidelines with
Atticus and me watching Cecil Jacobss father make touchdowns for
the Baptists.
One Saturday Jem and I decided to go exploring with our air-rifles
to see if we could find a rabbit or a squirrel. We had gone about five
hundred yards beyond the Radley Place when I noticed Jem squinting
at something down the street. He had turned his head to one side and
was looking out of the corners of his eyes.
Whatcha looking at?
That old dog down yonder, he said.
Thats old Tim Johnson, aint it?
Yeah.
Tim Johnson was the property of Mr. Harry Johnson who drove the
Mobile bus and lived on the southern edge of town.Tim was a livercolored
bird dog, the pet of Maycomb.
Whats he doing?
I dont know, Scout. We better go home.
Aw Jem, its February.
I dont care, Im gonna tell Cal.
We raced home and ran to the kitchen.
Cal, said Jem, can you come down the sidewalk a minute?
What for, Jem? I cant come down the sidewalk every time you
want me.
Theres somethin wrong with an old dog down yonder.
Calpurnia sighed. I cant wrap up any dogs foot now. Theres some
gauze in the bathroom, go get it and do it yourself.
Jem shook his head. Hes sick, Cal. Somethings wrong with him.
Whats he doin, trying to catch his tail?
No, hes doin like this.
Jem gulped like a goldfish, hunched his shoulders and twitched his
torso. Hes goin like that, only not like he means to.
Are you telling me a story, Jem Finch? Calpurnias voice
hardened.
No Cal, I swear Im not.
Was he runnin?
No, hes just moseyin along, so slow you cant hardly tell it. Hes
comin this way.
Calpurnia rinsed her hands and followed Jem into the yard. I dont
see any dog, she said.
She followed us beyond the Radley Place and looked where Jem
pointed. Tim Johnson was not much more than a speck in the distance,
but he was closer to us. He walked erratically, as if his right legswere
shorter than his left legs. He reminded me of a car stuck in a sandbed.
Hes gone lopsided, said Jem.
Calpurnia stared, then grabbed us by the shoulders and ran us
home. She shut the wood door behind us, went to the telephone and
shouted, Gimme Mr. Finchs office!
Mr. Finch! she shouted. This is Cal. I swear to God theres a mad
dog down the street a piecehes comin this way, yes sir, hes-Mr.
Finch, I declare he isold Tim Johnson, yes sir... yessir... yes
She hung up and shook her head when we tried to ask her what
Atticus had said. She rattled the telephone hook and said, Miss Eula
Maynow maam, Im through talkin to Mr. Finch, please dont
connect me no morelisten, Miss Eula May, can you call Miss Rachel
and Miss Stephanie Crawford and whoevers got a phone on this street
and tell em a mad dogs comin? Please maam!
Calpurnia listened. I know its February, Miss Eula May, but I
know a mad dog when I see one. Please maam hurry!
Calpurnia asked Jem, Radleys got a phone?
Jem looked in the book and said no. They wont come out anyway,
Cal.
I dont care, Im gonna tell em.
She ran to the front porch, Jem and I at her heels. You stay in that
house! she yelled.
Calpurnias message had been received by the neighborhood. Every
wood door within our range of vision was closed tight. We saw no trace
of Tim Johnson. We watched Calpurnia running toward the Radley
Place, holding her skirt and apron above her knees. She went up to the
front steps and banged on the door. She got no answer, and she
shouted, Mr. Nathan, Mr. Arthur, mad dogs comin! Mad dogs
comin!
Shes supposed to go around in back, I said.
Jem shook his head. Dont make any difference now, he said.
Calpurnia pounded on the door in vain. No one acknowledged her
warning; no one seemed to have heard it.
As Calpurnia sprinted to the back porch a black Ford swung into
the driveway. Atticus and Mr. Heck Tate got out.
Mr. Heck Tate was the sheriff of Maycomb County. He was as tall
as Atticus, but thinner. He was long-nosed, wore boots with shiny
metal eye-holes, boot pants and a lumber jacket. His belt had a row of
bullets sticking in it. He carried a heavy rifle. When he and Atticus
reached the porch, Jem opened the door.
Stay inside, son, said Atticus. Where is he, Cal?
He oughta be here by now, said Calpurnia, pointing down the
street.
Not runnin, is he? asked Mr. Tate.
Naw sir, hes in the twitchin stage, Mr. Heck.
Should we go after him, Heck? asked Atticus.
We better wait, Mr. Finch. They usually go in a straight line, but
you never can tell. He might follow the curvehope he does or hell go
straight in the Radley back yard. Lets wait a minute.
Dont think hell get in the Radley yard, said Atticus. Fencell
stop him. Hell probably follow the road....
I thought mad dogs foamed at the mouth, galloped, leaped and
lunged at throats, and I thought they did it in August. Had Tim
Johnson behaved thus, I would have been less frightened.
Nothing is more deadly than a deserted, waiting street. The trees
were still, the mockingbirds were silent, the carpenters at Miss
Maudies house had vanished. I heard Mr. Tate sniff, then blow his
nose. I saw him shift his gun to the crook of his arm. I saw Miss
Stephanie Crawfords face framed in the glass window of her front
door. Miss Maudie appeared and stood beside her. Atticus put his foot
on the rung of a chair and rubbed his hand slowly down the side of his
thigh.
There he is, he said softly.
Tim Johnson came into sight, walking dazedly in the inner rim of
the curve parallel to the Radley house.
Look at him, whispered Jem. Mr. Heck said they walked in a
straight line. He cant even stay in the road.
He looks more sick than anything, I said.
Let anything get in front of him and hell come straight at it.
Mr. Tate put his hand to his forehead and leaned forward. Hes got
it all right, Mr. Finch.
Tim Johnson was advancing at a snails pace, but he was not
playing or sniffing at foliage: he seemed dedicated to one course and
motivated by an invisible force that was inching him toward us. We
could see him shiver like a horse shedding flies; his jaw opened and
shut; he was alist, but he was being pulled gradually toward us.
Hes lookin for a place to die, said Jem.
Mr. Tate turned around. Hes far from dead, Jem, he hasnt got
started yet.
Tim Johnson reached the side street that ran in front of the Radley
Place, and what remained of his poor mind made him pause and seem
to consider which road he would take. He made a few hesitant steps
and stopped in front of the Radley gate; then he tried to turn around,
but was having difficulty.
Atticus said, Hes within range, Heck. You better get him before he
goes down the side streetLord knows whos around the corner. Go
inside, Cal.
Calpurnia opened the screen door, latched it behind her, then
unlatched it and held onto the hook. She tried to block Jem and me
with her body, but we looked out from beneath her arms.
Take him, Mr. Finch.Mr. Tate handed the rifle to Atticus; Jem
and I nearly fainted.
Dont waste time, Heck, said Atticus. Go on.
Mr. Finch, this is a one-shot job.
Atticus shook his head vehemently: Dont just stand there, Heck!
He wont wait all day for you
For Gods sake, Mr. Finch, look where he is! Miss and youll go
straight into the Radley house! I cant shoot that well and you know it!
I havent shot a gun in thirty years
Mr. Tate almost threw the rifle at Atticus. Id feel mighty
comfortable if you did now, he said.
In a fog, Jem and I watched our father take the gun and walk out
into the middle of the street. He walked quickly, but I thought he
moved like an underwater swimmer: time had slowed to a nauseating
crawl.
When Atticus raised his glasses Calpurnia murmured, Sweet Jesus
help him, and put her hands to her cheeks.
Atticus pushed his glasses to his forehead; they slipped down, and
he dropped them in the street. In the silence, I heard them crack.
Atticus rubbed his eyes and chin; we saw him blink hard.
In front of the Radley gate, Tim Johnson had made up what was
left of his mind. He had finally turned himself around, to pursue his
original course up our street. He made two steps forward, then stopped
and raised his head. We saw his body go rigid.
With movements so swift they seemed simultaneous, Atticuss
hand yanked a ball-tipped lever as he brought the gun to his shoulder.
The rifle cracked. Tim Johnson leaped, flopped over and crumpled
on the sidewalk in a brown-and-white heap. He didnt know what hit
him.
Mr. Tate jumped off the porch and ran to the Radley Place. He
stopped in front of the dog, squatted, turned around and tapped his
finger on his forehead above his left eye. You were a little to the right,
Mr. Finch, he called.
Always was, answered Atticus. If I had my druthers Id take a
shotgun.
He stooped and picked up his glasses, ground the broken lenses to
powder under his heel, and went to Mr. Tate and stood looking down at
Tim Johnson.
Doors opened one by one, and the neighborhood slowly came alive.
Miss Maudie walked down the steps with Miss Stephanie Crawford.
Jem was paralyzed. I pinched him to get him moving, but when
Atticus saw us coming he called, Stay where you are.
When Mr. Tate and Atticus returned to the yard, Mr. Tate was
smiling. Ill have Zeebo collect him, he said. You havent forgot
much, Mr. Finch. They say it never leaves you.
Atticus was silent.
Atticus? said Jem.
Yes?
Nothin.
I saw that, One-Shot Finch!
Atticus wheeled around and faced Miss Maudie. They looked at one
another without saying anything, and Atticus got into the sheriffs car.
Come here, he said to Jem. Dont you go near that dog, you
understand? Dont go near him, hes just as dangerous dead as alive.
Yes sir, said Jem. Atticus
What, son?
Nothing.
Whats the matter with you, boy, cant you talk? said Mr. Tate,
grinning at Jem. Didnt you know your daddys
Hush, Heck, said Atticus, lets go back to town.
When they drove away, Jem and I went to Miss Stephanies front
steps. We sat waiting for Zeebo to arrive in the garbage truck.
Jem sat in numbconfusion, and Miss Stephanie said, Uh, uh, uh,
whoda thought of a mad dog in February? Maybe he wadnt mad,
maybe he was just crazy. Id hate to see Harry Johnsons face when he
gets in from the Mobile run and finds Atticus Finchs shot his dog. Bet
he was just full of fleas from somewhere
Miss Maudie said Miss Stephanied be singing a different tune if
Tim Johnson was still coming up the street, that theyd find out soon
enough, theyd send his head to Montgomery.
Jem became vaguely articulate: d you see him, Scout? d you see
him just standin there?... n all of a sudden he just relaxed all over, an
it looked like that gun was a part of him... an he did it so quick, like... I
hafta aim for ten minutes fore I can hit somethin....
Miss Maudie grinned wickedly. Well now, Miss Jean Louise, she
said, still think your father cant do anything? Still ashamed of him?
Nome, I said meekly.
Forgot to tell you the other day that besides playing the Jews
Harp, Atticus Finch was the deadest shot inMaycomb County in his
time.
Dead shot... echoed Jem.
Thats what I said, Jem Finch. Guess youll change your tune now.
The very idea, didnt you know his nickname was Ol One-Shot when he
was a boy? Why, down at the Landing when he was coming up, if he
shot fifteen times and hit fourteen doves hed complain about wasting
ammunition.
He never said anything about that, Jem muttered.
Never said anything about it, did he?
No maam.
Wonder why he never goes huntin now, I said.
Maybe I can tell you, said Miss Maudie. If your fathers anything,
hes civilized in his heart. Marksmanships a gift of God, a talentoh,
you have to practice to make it perfect, but shootins different from
playing the piano or the like. I think maybe he put his gun downwhen
he realized that God had given him an unfair advantage over most
living things. I guess he decided he wouldnt shoot till he had to, and he
had to today.
Looks like hed be proud of it, I said.
People in their right minds never take pride in their talents, said
Miss Maudie.
We saw Zeebo drive up. He took a pitchfork from the back of the
garbage truck and gingerly lifted Tim Johnson. He pitched the dog
onto the truck, then poured something from a gallon jug on and around
the spot where Tim fell. Dont yawl come over here for a while, he
called.
When we went home I told Jem wed really have something to talk
about at school on Monday. Jem turned on me.
Dont say anything about it, Scout, he said.
What? I certainly am. Aint everybodys daddy the deadest shot in
Maycomb County.
Jem said, I reckon if hed wanted us to know it, heda told us. If he
was proud of it, heda told us.
Maybe it just slipped his mind, I said.
Naw, Scout, its something you wouldnt understand. Atticus is
real old, but I wouldnt care if he couldnt do anythingI wouldnt care
if he couldnt do a blessed thing.
Jem picked up a rock and threw it jubilantly at the carhouse.
Running after it, he called back: Atticus is a gentleman, just like me!
11
When we were small, Jem and I confined our activities to the
southern neighborhood, but when I was well into the second grade at
school and tormenting Boo Radley became passe, the business section
of Maycomb drew us frequently up the street past the real property of
Mrs. Henry Lafayette Dubose. It was impossible to go to town without
passing her house unless we wished to walk a mile out of the way.
Previous minor encounters with her left me with no desire for more,
but Jem said I had to grow up some time.
Mrs. Dubose lived alone except for a Negro girl in constant
attendance, two doors up the street from us in a house with steep front
steps and a dog-trot hall. She was very old; she spent most of each day
in bed and the rest of it in a wheelchair. It was rumored that she kept a
CSA pistol concealed among her numerous shawls and wraps.
Jem and I hated her. If she was on the porch when we passed, we
would be raked by her wrathful gaze, subjected to ruthless
interrogation regarding our behavior, and given a melancholy
prediction on what we would amount to when we grew up, which was
always nothing. We had long ago given up the idea of walking past her
house on the opposite side of the street; that only made her raise her
voice and let the whole neighborhood in on it.
We could do nothing to please her. If I said as sunnily as I could,
Hey, Mrs. Dubose, I would receive for an answer, Dont you say hey
to me, you ugly girl! You say good afternoon, Mrs. Dubose!
She was vicious. Once she heard Jem refer to our father as Atticus
and her reaction was apoplectic. Besides being the sassiest, most
disrespectful mutts who ever passed her way, we were told that it was
quite a pity our father had not remarried after our mothers death. A
lovelier lady than our mother never lived, she said, and it was
heartbreaking the way Atticus Finch let her children run wild. I did not
remember our mother, but Jem didhe would tell me about her
sometimesand he went livid when Mrs. Dubose shot us this message.
Jem, having survived Boo Radley, a mad dog and other terrors, had
concluded that it was cowardly to stop at Miss Rachels front steps and
wait, and had decreed that we must run as far as the post office corner
each evening to meet Atticus coming from work. Countless evenings
Atticus would find Jem furious at something Mrs. Dubose had said
when we went by.
Easy does it, son, Atticus would say. Shes an old lady and shes
ill. You just hold your head high and be a gentleman. Whatever she
says to you, its your job not to let her make you mad.
Jem would say she must not be very sick, she hollered so. When the
three of us came to her house, Atticus would sweep off his hat, wave
gallantly to her and say, Good evening, Mrs. Dubose! You look like a
picture this evening.
I never heard Atticus say like a picture of what. He would tell her
the courthouse news, and would say he hoped with all his heart shed
have a good day tomorrow. He would return his hat to his head, swing
me to his shoulders in her very presence, and we would go home in the
twilight. It was times like these when I thought my father, who hated
guns and had never been to any wars, was the bravest man who ever
lived.
The day after Jems twelfth birthday his money was burning up his
pockets, so we headed for town in the early afternoon. Jem thought he
had enough to buy a miniature steam engine for himself and a twirling
baton for me.
I had long had my eye on that baton: it was at V. J. Elmores, it was
bedecked with sequins and tinsel, it cost seventeen cents. It was then
my burning ambition togrow up and twirl with the Maycomb County
High School band. Having developed my talent to where I could throw
up a stick and almost catch it coming down, I had caused Calpurnia to
deny me entrance to the house every time she saw me with a stick in
my hand. I felt that I could overcome this defect with a real baton, and
I thought it generous of Jem to buy one for me.
Mrs. Dubose was stationed on her porch when we went by.
Where are you two going at this time of day? she shouted.
Playing hooky, I suppose. Ill just call up the principal and tell him!
She put her hands on the wheels of her chair and executed a perfect
right face.
Aw, its Saturday, Mrs. Dubose, said Jem.
Makes no difference if its Saturday, she said obscurely. I wonder
if your father knows where you are?
Mrs. Dubose, weve been goin to town by ourselves since we were
this high.Jem placed his hand palm down about two feet above the
sidewalk.
Dont you lie to me! she yelled. Jeremy Finch, Maudie Atkinson
told me you broke down her scuppernong arbor this morning. Shes
going to tell your father and then youll wish you never saw the light of
day! If you arent sent to the reform school before next week, my
names not Dubose!
Jem, who hadnt been near Miss Maudies scuppernong arbor since
last summer, and who knew Miss Maudie wouldnt tell Atticus if he
had, issued a general denial.
Dont you contradict me! Mrs. Dubose bawled. And you she
pointed an arthritic finger at mewhat are you doing in those
overalls? You should be ina dress and camisole, young lady! Youll
grow up waiting on tables if somebody doesnt change your waysa
Finch waiting on tables at the O.K. Cafehah!
I was terrified. The O.K. Cafe was a dim organization on the north
side of the square. I grabbed Jems hand but he shook me loose.
Come on, Scout, he whispered. Dont pay any attention to her,
just hold your head high and be a gentleman.
But Mrs. Dubose held us: Not only a Finch waiting on tables but
one in the courthouse lawing for niggers!
Jem stiffened. Mrs. Duboses shot had gone home and she knew it:
Yes indeed, what has this world come to when a Finch goes against
his raising? Ill tell you! She put her hand to her mouth. When she
drew it away, it trailed a long silver thread of saliva. Your fathers no
better than the niggers and trash he works for!
Jem was scarlet. I pulled at his sleeve, and we were followed up the
sidewalk by a philippic on our familys moral degeneration, the major
premise of which was that half the Finches were in the asylum anyway,
but if our mother were living we would not have come to such a state.
I wasnt sure what Jem resented most, but I took umbrage at Mrs.
Duboses assessment of the familys mental hygiene. I had become
almost accustomed to hearing insults aimed at Atticus. But this was the
first one coming from an adult. Except for her remarks about Atticus,
Mrs. Duboses attack was only routine. There was a hint of summer in
the airin the shadows it was cool, but the sun was warm, which
meant good times coming: no school and Dill.
Jem bought his steam engine and we went by Elmores for my
baton. Jem took no pleasure in his acquisition; he jammed it in his
pocket and walked silently beside me toward home. On the way home I
nearly hit Mr. Link Deas, who said, Look out now, Scout! when I
missed a toss, and when we approached Mrs. Duboses house my baton
was grimy from having picked it up out of the dirt so many times.
She was not on the porch.
In later years, I sometimes wondered exactly what made Jem do it,
whatmade him break the bonds of You just be a gentleman, son, and
the phase of self-conscious rectitude he had recently entered. Jem had
probably stood as much guff about Atticus lawing for niggers as had I,
and I took it for granted that he kept his temperhe had a naturally
tranquil disposition and a slow fuse. At the time, however, I thought
the only explanation for what he did was that for a few minutes he
simply went mad.
What Jem did was something Id do as a matter of course had I not
been under Atticuss interdict, which I assumed included not fighting
horrible old ladies. We had just come to her gate when Jem snatched
my baton and ran flailing wildly up the steps into Mrs. Duboses front
yard, forgetting everything Atticus had said, forgetting that she packed
a pistol under her shawls, forgetting that if Mrs. Dubose missed, her
girl Jessie probably wouldnt.
He did not begin to calm down until he had cut the tops off every
camellia bush Mrs. Dubose owned, until the ground was littered with
green buds and leaves. He bent my baton against his knee, snapped it
in two and threw it down.
By that time I was shrieking. Jem yanked my hair, said he didnt
care, hed do it again if he got a chance, and if I didnt shut up hed pull
every hair out of my head. I didnt shut up and he kicked me. I lost my
balance and fell on my face. Jem picked me up roughly but looked like
he was sorry. There was nothing to say.
We did not choose to meet Atticus coming home that evening. We
skulked around the kitchen until Calpurnia threw us out. By some voodoo
system Calpurnia seemed to know all about it. She was a less than
satisfactory source of palliation, but she did give Jem a hot biscuit-andbutter
which he tore in half and shared with me. It tasted like cotton.
We went to the livingroom. I picked up a football magazine, found
a picture of Dixie Howell, showed it to Jem and said, This looks like
you.That was the nicest thing I could think to say to him, but it was
no help. He sat by the windows, hunched down in a rocking chair,
scowling, waiting. Daylight faded.
Two geological ages later, we heard the soles of Atticuss shoes
scrape the front steps. The screen door slammed, there was a pause-
Atticus was at the hat rack in the halland we heard him call, Jem!
His voice was like the winter wind.
Atticus switched on the ceiling light in the livingroom and found us
there, frozen still. He carried my baton in one hand; its filthy yellow
tassel trailed on the rug. He held out his other hand; it contained fat
camellia buds.
Jem, he said, are you responsible for this?
Yes sir.
Whyd you do it?
Jem said softly, She said you lawed for niggers and trash.
You did this because she said that?
Jems lips moved, but his, Yes sir, was inaudible.
Son, I have no doubt that youve been annoyed by your
contemporaries about me lawing for niggers, as you say, but to do
something like this to a sick old lady is inexcusable. I strongly advise
you to go down and have a talk with Mrs. Dubose, said Atticus. Come
straight home afterward.
Jem did not move.
Go on, I said.
I followed Jem out of the livingroom. Come back here, Atticus
said to me. I came back.
Atticus picked up the Mobile Press and sat down in the rocking
chair Jem had vacated. For the life of me, I did not understand how he
could sit there in cold blood and read a newspaper when his only son
stood an excellent chance of being murdered with a Confederate Army
relic. Of course Jem antagonized me sometimes until I could kill him,
but when it came down to it he was all I had. Atticus did not seem to
realize this, or if he did he didnt care.
I hated him for that, but when you are in trouble you become easily
tired: soon I was hiding in his lap and his arms were around me.
Youre mighty big to be rocked, he said.
You dont care what happens to him, I said. You just send him
on to get shot at when all he was doin was standin up for you.
Atticus pushed my head under his chin. Its not time to worry yet,
he said. I never thought Jemd be the one to lose his head over thisthought
Id have more trouble with you.
I said I didnt see why we had to keep our heads anyway, that
nobody I knew at school had to keep his head about anything.
Scout, said Atticus, when summer comes youll have to keep
your head about far worse things... its not fair for you and Jem, I know
that, but sometimes we have to make the best of things, and the way we
conduct ourselves when the chips are downwell, all I can say is, when
you and Jem are grown, maybe youll look back on this with some
compassion and some feeling that I didnt let you down. This case, Tom
Robinsons case, is something that goes to the essence of a mans
conscienceScout, I couldnt go to church and worship God if I didnt
try to help that man.
Atticus, you must be wrong....
Hows that?
Well, most folks seem to think theyre right and youre wrong....
Theyre certainly entitled to think that, and theyre entitled to full
respect for their opinions, said Atticus, but before I can live with
other folks Ive got to live with myself. The one thing that doesnt abide
by majority rule is a persons conscience.
When Jem returned, he found me still in Atticuss lap, Well, son?
said Atticus. He set me on my feet, and I made a secret reconnaissance
of Jem. He seemed to be all in one piece, but he had a queer look on his
face. Perhaps she had given him a dose of calomel.
I cleaned it up for her and said I was sorry, but I aint, and that Id
work on em ever Saturday and try to make em grow back out.
There was no point insaying you were sorry if you arent, said
Atticus. Jem, shes old and ill. You cant hold her responsible for what
she says and does. Of course, Id rather shed have said it to me than to
either of you, but we cant always have our druthers.
Jem seemed fascinated by a rose in the carpet. Atticus, he said,
she wants me to read to her.
Read to her?
Yes sir. She wants me to come every afternoon after school and
Saturdays and read to her out loud for two hours. Atticus, do I have
to?
Certainly.
But she wants me to do it for a month.
Then youll do it for a month.
Jem planted his big toe delicately in the center of the rose and
pressed it in. Finally he said, Atticus, its all right on the sidewalk but
inside itsits all dark and creepy. Theres shadows and things on the
ceiling....
Atticus smiled grimly. That should appeal to your imagination.
Just pretend youre inside the Radley house.
The following Monday afternoon Jem and I climbed the steep front
steps to Mrs. Duboses house and padded down the open hallway. Jem,
armed with Ivanhoe and full of superior knowledge, knocked at the
second door on the left.
Mrs. Dubose? he called.
Jessie opened the wood door and unlatched the screen door.
Is that you, Jem Finch? she said. You got your sister with you. I
dont know
Let em both in, Jessie, said Mrs. Dubose. Jessie admitted us and
went off to the kitchen.
An oppressive odor met us when we crossed the threshold, an odor
I had met many times in rain-rotted gray houses where there are coaloil
lamps, water dippers, and unbleached domestic sheets. It always
made me afraid, expectant, watchful.
In the corner of the room was a brass bed, and in the bed was Mrs.
Dubose. I wondered if Jems activities had put her there, and for a
moment I felt sorry for her. She was lying under a pile of quilts and
looked almost friendly.
There was a marble-topped washstand by her bed; on it were a
glass with a teaspoon in it, a red ear syringe, a box of absorbent cotton,
and a steel alarm clock standing on three tiny legs.
So you brought that dirty little sister of yours, did you? was her
greeting.
Jem said quietly, My sister aint dirty and I aint scared of you,
although I noticed his knees shaking.
I was expecting a tirade, but all she said was, You may commence
reading, Jeremy.
Jem sat down in a cane-bottom chair and opened Ivanhoe. I pulled
up another one and sat beside him.
Come closer, said Mrs. Dubose. Come to the side of the bed.
We moved our chairs forward. This was the nearest I had ever been
to her, and the thing I wanted most to do was move my chair back
again.
She was horrible. Her face was the color of a dirty pillowcase, and
the corners of her mouth glistened with wet, which inched like a glacier
down the deep grooves enclosing her chin. Old-age liver spots dotted
her cheeks, and her pale eyes had black pinpoint pupils. Her hands
were knobby, and the cuticles were grown up over her fingernails. Her
bottom plate was not in, and her upper lip protruded; from time to
time she would draw her nether lip to her upper plate and carry her
chin with it. This made the wet move faster.
I didnt look any more than I had to. Jem reopened Ivanhoe and
began reading. I tried to keep up with him, but he read too fast. When
Jem came to a word he didnt know, he skipped it, but Mrs. Dubose
would catch him and make him spell it out. Jem read for perhaps
twenty minutes, during which time I looked at the soot-stained
mantelpiece, out the window, anywhere to keep from looking at her. As
he read along, I noticed that Mrs. Duboses corrections grew fewer and
farther between, that Jem had even left one sentence dangling in midair.
She was not listening.
I looked toward the bed.
Something had happened to her. She lay on her back, with the
quilts up to her chin. Only her head and shoulders were visible. Her
head moved slowly from side to side. From time to time she would
open her mouth wide, and I could see her tongue undulate faintly.
Cords of saliva would collect on her lips; she would draw them in, then
open her mouth again. Her mouth seemed to have a private existence
of its own. It worked separate and apart from the rest of her, out and
in, like a clam hole at low tide. Occasionally it would say, Pt, like
some viscous substance coming to a boil.
I pulled Jems sleeve.
He looked at me, then at the bed. Her head made its regular sweep
toward us, and Jem said, Mrs. Dubose, are you all right? She did not
hear him.
The alarm clock went off and scared us stiff. A minute later, nerves
still tingling, Jem and I were on the sidewalk headed for home. We did
not run away, Jessie sent us: before the clock wound down she was in
the room pushing Jem and me out of it.
Shoo, she said, you all go home.
Jem hesitated at the door.
Its time for her medicine, Jessie said. As the door swung shut
behind us I saw Jessie walking quickly toward Mrs. Duboses bed.
It was only three forty-five when we got home, so Jem and I dropkicked
in the back yard until it was time to meet Atticus. Atticus had
two yellow pencils for me and a football magazine for Jem, which I
suppose was a silent reward for our first days session with Mrs.
Dubose. Jem told him what happened.
Did she frighten you? asked Atticus.
No sir, said Jem, but shes so nasty. She has fits or somethin.
She spits a lot.
She cant help that. When people are sick they dont look nice
sometimes.
She scared me, I said.
Atticus looked at me over his glasses. You dont have to go with
Jem, you know.
The next afternoon at Mrs. Duboses was the same as the first, and
so was the next, until gradually a pattern emerged: everything would
begin normallythat is, Mrs. Dubose would hound Jem for a while on
her favorite subjects, her camellias and our fathers nigger-loving
propensities; she would grow increasingly silent, then go away from us.
The alarm clock would ring, Jessie would shoo us out, and the rest of
the day was ours.
Atticus, I said one evening, what exactly is a nigger-lover?
Atticuss face was grave. Has somebody been calling you that?
No sir, Mrs. Dubose calls you that. She warms up every afternoon
calling you that. Francis called me that last Christmas, thats where I
first heard it.
Is that the reason you jumped on him? asked Atticus.
Yes sir...
Then why are you asking me what it means?
I tried to explain to Atticus that it wasnt so much what Francis said
that had infuriated me as the way he had said it. It was like hed said
snot-nose or somethin.
Scout, said Atticus, nigger-lover is just one of those terms that
dont mean anythinglike snot-nose. Its hard to explainignorant,
trashy people use it when they think somebodys favoring Negroes over
and above themselves. Its slipped into usage with some people like
ourselves, when they want a common, ugly term to label somebody.
You arent really a nigger-lover, then, are you?
I certainly am. I do my best to love everybody... Im hard put,
sometimesbaby, its never an insult to be called what somebody
thinks is a bad name. It just shows you how poor that person is, it
doesnt hurt you. So dont let Mrs. Dubose get you down. She has
enough troubles of her own.
One afternoon a month later Jem was ploughing his way through
Sir Walter Scout, as Jem called him, and Mrs. Dubose was correcting
him at every turn, when there was a knock on the door. Come in! she
screamed.
Atticus came in. He went to the bed and took Mrs. Duboses hand.
I was coming from the office and didnt see the children, he said. I
thought they might still be here.
Mrs. Dubose smiled at him. For the life of me I could not figure out
how she could bring herself to speak to him when she seemed to hate
him so. Do you know what time it is, Atticus? she said. Exactly
fourteen minutes past five. The alarm clocks set for five-thirty. I want
you to know that.
It suddenly cameto me that each day we had been staying a little
longer at Mrs. Duboses, that the alarm clock went off a few minutes
later every day, and that she was well into one of her fits by the time it
sounded. Today she had antagonized Jem for nearly two hours with no
intention of having a fit, and I felt hopelessly trapped. The alarm clock
was the signal for our release; if one day it did not ring, what would we
do?
I have a feeling that Jems reading days are numbered, said
Atticus.
Only a week longer, I think, she said, just to make sure...
Jem rose. But
Atticus put out his hand and Jem was silent. On the way home, Jem
said he had to do it just for a month and the month was up and it
wasnt fair.
Just one more week, son, said Atticus.
No, said Jem.
Yes, said Atticus.
The following week found us back at Mrs. Duboses. The alarm
clock had ceased sounding, but Mrs. Dubose would release us with,
Thatll do, so late in the afternoon Atticus would be home reading the
paper when we returned. Although her fits had passed off, she was in
every other way her old self: when Sir Walter Scott became involved in
lengthy descriptions of moats and castles, Mrs. Dubose would become
bored and pick on us:
Jeremy Finch, I told you youd live to regret tearing up my
camellias. You regret it now, dont you?
Jem would say he certainly did.
Thought you could kill my Snow-on-the-Mountain, did you? Well,
Jessie says the tops growing back out. Next time youll know how to do
it right, wont you? Youll pull it up by the roots, wont you?
Jem would say he certainly would.
Dont you mutter at me, boy! You hold up your head and say yes
maam. Dont guess you feel like holding it up, though, with your father
what he is.
Jems chin would come up, and he would gaze at Mrs. Dubose with
a face devoid of resentment. Through the weeks he had cultivated an
expression of polite and detached interest, which he would present to
her in answer to her most blood-curdling inventions.
At last the day came. When Mrs. Dubose said, Thatll do, one
afternoon, she added, And thats all. Good-day to you.
It was over. We bounded down the sidewalk on a spree of sheer
relief, leaping and howling.
That spring was a good one: the days grew longer and gave us more
playing time. Jems mind was occupied mostly with the vital statistics
of every college football player in the nation. Every night Atticus would
read us the sports pages of the newspapers. Alabama might go to the
Rose Bowl again this year, judging from its prospects, not one of whose
names we could pronounce. Atticus was in the middle of Windy
Seatons column one evening when the telephone rang.
He answered it, then went to the hat rack in the hall. Im going
down to Mrs. Duboses for a while, he said. I wont be long.
But Atticus stayed away until long past my bedtime. When he
returned he was carrying a candy box. Atticus sat down in the
livingroom and put the box on the floor beside his chair.
Whatd she want? asked Jem.
We had not seen Mrs. Dubose for over a month. She was never on
the porch any more when we passed.
Shes dead, son, said Atticus. She died a few minutes ago.
Oh, said Jem. Well.
Well is right, said Atticus. Shes not suffering any more. She was
sick for a long time. Son, didnt you know what her fits were?
Jem shook his head.
Mrs. Dubose was a morphine addict, said Atticus. She took it as
a pain-killer for years. The doctor put her on it. Shed have spent the
rest of her life on it and died without so much agony, but she was too
contrary
Sir? said Jem.
Atticus said, Just before your escapade she called me to make her
will. Dr. Reynolds told her she had only a few months left. Her business
affairs were in perfect order but she said, Theres still one thing out of
order.
What was that? Jem was perplexed.
She said she was going to leave this world beholden to nothing and
nobody. Jem, when youre sick as she was, its all right to take anything
to make it easier, but it wasnt all right for her. She said she meant to
break herself of it before she died, and thats what she did.
Jem said, You mean thats what her fits were?
Yes, thats what they were. Most of the time you were reading to
her I doubt if she heard a word you said. Her whole mind and body
were concentrated on that alarm clock. If youhadnt fallen into her
hands, Id have made you go read to her anyway. It may have been
some distraction. There was another reason
Did she die free? asked Jem.
As the mountain air, said Atticus. She was conscious to the last,
almost. Conscious, he smiled, and cantankerous. She still
disapproved heartily of my doings, and said Id probably spend the rest
of my life bailing you out of jail. She had Jessie fix you this box
Atticus reached down and picked up the candy box. He handed it to
Jem.
Jem opened the box. Inside, surrounded by wads of damp cotton,
was a white, waxy, perfect camellia. It was a Snow-on-the-Mountain.
Jems eyes nearly popped out of his head. Old hell-devil, old helldevil!
he screamed, flinging it down. Why cant she leave me alone?
In a flash Atticus was up and standing over him. Jem buried his
face in Atticuss shirt front. Sh-h, he said. I think that was her way of
telling youeverythings all right now, Jem, everythings all right. You
know, she was a great lady.
A lady? Jem raised his head. His face was scarlet. After all those
things she said about you, a lady?
She was. She had her own views about things, a lot different from
mine, maybe... son, I told you that if you hadnt lost your head Id have
made you go read to her. I wanted you to see something about her-I
wanted you to see what real courage is, instead of getting the idea that
courage is a man with a gun in his hand. Its when you know youre
licked before you begin but you begin anyway and you see it through no
matter what. You rarely win, but sometimes you do. Mrs. Dubose won,
all ninety-eight pounds of her. According to her views, she died
beholden to nothing and nobody. She was the bravest person I ever
knew.
Jem picked up the candy box and threw it in the fire. He picked up
the camellia, and when I went off to bed I saw him fingering the wide
petals. Atticus was reading the paper.
PART TWO
12
Jem was twelve. He was difficult to live with, inconsistent, moody.
His appetite was appalling, and he told me so many times to stop
pestering him I consulted Atticus: Reckon hes got a tapeworm?
Atticus said no, Jem was growing. I must be patient with him and
disturb him as little as possible.
This change in Jem had come about in a matter of weeks. Mrs.
Dubose was not cold in her graveJem had seemed grateful enough for
my company when he went to read to her. Overnight, it seemed, Jem
had acquired an alien set of values and was trying to impose them on
me: several times he went so far as to tell me what to do. After one
altercation when Jem hollered, Its time you started beina girl and
acting right! I burst into tears and fled to Calpurnia.
Dont you fret too much over Mister Jem she began.
Mister Jem?
Yeah, hes just about Mister Jem now.
He aint that old, I said. All he needs is somebody to beat him
up, and I aint big enough.
Baby, said Calpurnia, I just cant help it if Mister Jems growin
up. Hes gonna want to be off to himself a lot now, doin whatever boys
do, so you just come right on in the kitchen when you feel lonesome.
Well find lots of things to do in here.
The beginning of that summer boded well: Jem could do as he
pleased; Calpurnia would do until Dill came. She seemed glad to see
me when I appeared in the kitchen, and by watching her I began to
think there was some skill involved in being a girl.
But summer came and Dill was not there. I received a letter and a
snapshot from him. The letter said he had a new father whose picture
was enclosed, and he would have to stay in Meridian because they
planned to build a fishing boat. His father was a lawyer like Atticus,
only much younger. Dills new father had a pleasant face, which made
me glad Dill had captured him, but I was crushed. Dill concluded by
saying he would love me forever and not to worry, he would come get
me and marry me as soon as he got enough money together, so please
write.
The fact that I had a permanent fiance was little compensation for
his absence: I had never thought about it, but summer was Dill by the
fishpool smoking string, Dills eyes alive with complicated plans to
make Boo Radley emerge; summer was the swiftness with which Dill
would reach up and kiss me when Jem was not looking, the longings
we sometimes felt each other feel. With him, life was routine; without
him, life was unbearable. I stayed miserable for two days.
As if that were not enough, the state legislature was called into
emergency session and Atticus left us for two weeks. The Governor was
eager to scrape a few barnacles off the ship of state; there were sitdown
strikes in Birmingham; bread lines in the cities grew longer,
people in the country grew poorer. But these were events remote from
the world of Jem and me.
We were surprised one morning to see a cartoon in the
Montgomery Advertiser above the caption, Maycombs Finch. It
showed Atticus barefooted and in short pants, chained to a desk: he
was diligently writing on a slate while some frivolous-looking girls
yelled, Yoo-hoo! at him.
Thats a compliment, explained Jem. He spends his time doin
things that wouldnt get done if nobody did em.
Huh?
In addition to Jems newly developed characteristics, he had
acquired a maddening air of wisdom.
Oh, Scout, its like reorganizing the tax systems of the counties and
things. That kind of things pretty dry to most men.
How do you know?
Oh, go on and leave me alone. Im readin the paper.
Jem got his wish. I departed for the kitchen.
While she was shelling peas, Calpurnia suddenly said, What am I
gonna do about you alls church this Sunday?
Nothing, I reckon. Atticus left us collection.
Calpurnias eyes narrowed and I could tell what was going through
her mind. Cal, I said, you know well behave. We havent done
anything in church in years.
Calpurnia evidently remembered a rainy Sunday when we were
both fatherless and teacherless. Left to its own devices, the class tied
Eunice Ann Simpson to a chair and placed her in the furnace room. We
forgot her, trooped upstairs to church, and were listening quietly to the
sermon when a dreadful banging issued from the radiator pipes,
persisting until someone investigated and brought forth Eunice Ann
saying she didnt want to play Shadrach any moreJem Finch said she
wouldnt get burnt if she had enough faith, but it was hot down there.
Besides, Cal, this isnt the first time Atticus has left us, I
protested.
Yeah, but he makes certain your teachers gonna be there. I didnt
hear him say this timereckon he forgot it. Calpurnia scratched her
head. Suddenly she smiled. Howd you and Mister Jem like to come to
church with me tomorrow?
Really?
How bout it? grinned Calpurnia.
If Calpurnia had ever bathed me roughly before, it was nothing
compared to her supervision of that Saturday nights routine. She made
me soap all over twice, drew fresh water in the tub for each rinse; she
stuck my head in the basin and washed it with Octagon soap and
castile. She had trusted Jem for years, but that night she invaded his
privacy and provoked an outburst: Cant anybody take a bath in this
house without the whole family lookin?
Next morning she began earlier than usual, to go over our
clothes. When Calpurnia stayed overnight with us she slept on a
folding cot in the kitchen; that morning it was covered with our Sunday
habiliments. She had put so much starch in my dress it came up like a
tent when I sat down. She made me wear a petticoat and she wrapped a
pink sash tightly around my waist. She went over my patent-leather
shoes with a cold biscuit until she saw her face in them.
Its like we were goin to Mardi Gras, said Jem. Whats all this
for, Cal?
I dont want anybody sayin I dont look after my children, she
muttered. Mister Jem, you absolutely cant wear that tie with that suit.
Its green.
smatter with that?
Suits blue. Cant you tell?
Hee hee, I howled, Jems color blind.
His face flushed angrily, but Calpurnia said, Now you all quit that.
Youre gonna go to First Purchase with smiles on your faces.
First Purchase African M.E. Church was in the Quarters outside the
southerntown limits, across the old sawmill tracks. It was an ancient
paint-peeled frame building, the only church in Maycomb with a
steeple and bell, called First Purchase because it was paid for from the
first earnings of freed slaves. Negroes worshiped in it on Sundays and
white men gambled in it on weekdays.
The churchyard was brick-hard clay, as was the cemetery beside it.
If someone died during a dry spell, the body was covered with chunks
of ice until rain softened the earth. A few graves in the cemetery were
marked with crumbling tombstones; newer ones were outlined with
brightly colored glass and broken Coca-Cola bottles. Lightning rods
guarding some graves denoted dead who rested uneasily; stumps of
burned-out candles stood at the heads of infant graves. It was a happy
cemetery.
The warm bittersweet smell of clean Negro welcomed us as we
entered the churchyardHearts of Love hairdressing mingled with
asafoetida, snuff, Hoyts Cologne, Browns Mule, peppermint, and lilac
talcum.
When they saw Jem and me with Calpurnia, the men stepped back
and took off their hats; the women crossed their arms at their waists,
weekday gestures of respectful attention. They parted and made a small
pathway to the church door for us. Calpurnia walked between Jem and
me, responding to the greetings of her brightly clad neighbors.
What you up to, Miss Cal? said a voice behind us.
Calpurnias hands went to our shoulders and we stopped and
looked around: standing in the path behind us was a tall Negro woman.
Her weight was on one leg; she rested her left elbow in the curve of her
hip, pointing at us with upturned palm. She was bullet-headed with
strange almond-shaped eyes, straight nose, and an Indian-bow mouth.
She seemed seven feet high.
I felt Calpurnias hand dig into my shoulder. What you want,
Lula? she asked, in tones I had never heard her use. She spoke quietly,
contemptuously.
I wants to know why you bringin white chillun to nigger church.
Theys my compny, said Calpurnia. Again I thought her voice
strange: she was talking like the rest of them.
Yeah, anI reckon yous compny at the Finch house durin the
week.
A murmur ran through the crowd. Dont you fret, Calpurnia
whispered to me, but the roses on her hat trembled indignantly.
When Lula came up the pathway toward us Calpurnia said, Stop
right there, nigger.
Lula stopped, but she said, You aint got no business bringin white
chillun herethey got their church, we got ourn. It is our church, aint
it, Miss Cal?
Calpurnia said, Its the same God, aint it?
Jem said, Lets go home, Cal, they dont want us here
I agreed: they did not want us here. I sensed, rather than saw, that
we were being advanced upon. They seemed to be drawing closer to us,
but when I looked up at Calpurnia there was amusement in her eyes.
When I looked down the pathway again, Lula was gone. In her place
was a solid mass of colored people.
One of them stepped from the crowd. It was Zeebo, the garbage
collector. Mister Jem, he said, were mighty glad to have you all
here. Dont pay no tention to Lula, shes contentious because Reverend
Sykes threatened to church her. Shes a troublemaker from way back,
got fancy ideas an haughty wayswere mighty glad to have you all.
With that, Calpurnia led us to the church door where we were
greeted by Reverend Sykes, who led us to the front pew.
First Purchase was unceiled and unpainted within. Along its walls
unlighted kerosene lamps hung on brass brackets; pine benches served
as pews. Behind the rough oak pulpit a faded pink silk banner
proclaimed God Is Love, the churchs only decoration except a
rotogravure print of Hunts The Light of the World. There was no sign
of piano, organ, hymn-books, church programsthe familiar
ecclesiastical impedimenta we saw every Sunday. It was dim inside,
with a damp coolness slowly dispelled by the gathering congregation.
At each seat was a cheap cardboard fan bearing a garish Garden of
Gethsemane, courtesy Tyndals Hardware Co. (You-Name-It-We-Sell-
It).
Calpurnia motioned Jem and me to the end of the row and placed
herself between us. She fished in her purse, drew out her handkerchief,
and untied the hard wad of change in its corner. She gave a dime to me
and a dime to Jem. Weve got ours, he whispered. You keep it,
Calpurnia said, youre my company. Jems face showed brief
indecision on the ethics of withholding his own dime, but his innate
courtesy won and he shifted his dime to his pocket. I did likewise with
no qualms.
Cal, I whispered, where are the hymn-books?
We dont have any, she said.
Well how-?
Sh-h,she said. Reverend Sykes was standing behind the pulpit
staring the congregation to silence. He was a short, stocky man in a
black suit, black tie, white shirt, and a gold watch-chain that glinted in
the light from the frosted windows.
He said, Brethren and sisters, we are particularly glad to have
company with us this morning. Mister and Miss Finch. You all know
their father. Before I begin I will read some announcements.
Reverend Sykes shuffled some papers, chose one and held it at
arms length. The Missionary Society meets in the home of Sister
Annette Reeves next Tuesday. Bring your sewing.
He read from another paper. You all know of Brother Tom
Robinsons trouble. He has been a faithful member of First Purchase
since he was a boy. The collection taken up today and for the next three
Sundays will go to Helenhis wife, to help her out at home.
I punched Jem. Thats the Tom Atticuss de
Sh-h!
I turned to Calpurnia but was hushed before I opened my mouth.
Subdued, I fixed my attention upon Reverend Sykes, who seemed to be
waiting for me to settle down. Will the music superintendent lead us
in the first hymn, he said.
Zeebo rose from his pew and walked down the center aisle,
stopping in front of us and facing the congregation. He was carrying a
battered hymn-book. He opened it and said, Well sing number two
seventy-three.
This was too much for me. Howre we gonna sing it if there aint
any hymn-books?
Calpurnia smiled. Hush baby, she whispered, youll see in a
minute.
Zeebo cleared his throat and read in a voice like the rumble of
distant artillery:
Theres a land beyond the river.
Miraculously on pitch, a hundred voices sang out Zeebos words.
The last syllable, held to a husky hum, was followed by Zeebo saying,
That we call the sweet forever.
Music again swelled around us; the last note lingered and Zeebo
met it with the next line: And we only reach that shore by faiths
decree.
The congregation hesitated, Zeebo repeated the line carefully, and
it was sung. At the chorus Zeebo closed the book, a signal for the
congregation to proceed without his help.
On the dying notes of Jubilee, Zeebo said, In that far-off sweet
forever, just beyond the shining river.
Line for line, voices followed in simple harmony until thehymn
ended in a melancholy murmur.
I looked at Jem, who was looking at Zeebo from the corners of his
eyes. I didnt believe it either, but we had both heard it.
Reverend Sykes then called on the Lord to bless the sick and the
suffering, a procedure no different from our church practice, except
Reverend Sykes directed the Deitys attention to several specific cases.
His sermon was a forthright denunciation of sin, an austere
declaration of the motto on the wall behind him: he warned his flock
against the evils of heady brews, gambling, and strange women.
Bootleggers caused enough trouble in the Quarters, but women were
worse. Again, as I had often met it in my own church, I was confronted
with the Impurity of Women doctrine that seemed to preoccupy all
clergymen.
Jem and I had heard the same sermon Sunday after Sunday, with
only one exception. Reverend Sykes used his pulpit more freely to
express his views on individual lapses from grace: Jim Hardy had been
absent from church for five Sundays and he wasnt sick; Constance
Jackson had better watch her waysshe was in grave danger for
quarreling with her neighbors; she had erected the only spite fence in
the history of the Quarters.
Reverend Sykes closed his sermon. He stood beside a table in front
of the pulpit and requested the morning offering, a proceeding that was
strange to Jem and me. One by one, the congregation came forward
and dropped nickels and dimes into a black enameled coffee can. Jem
and I followed suit, and received a soft, Thank you, thank you, as our
dimes clinked.
To our amazement, Reverend Sykes emptied the can onto the table
and raked the coins into his hand. He straightened up and said, This is
not enough, we must have ten dollars.
The congregation stirred. You all know what its forHelen cant
leave those children to work while Toms in jail. If everybody gives one
more dime, well have it Reverend Sykes waved his hand and called
to someone in the back of the church. Alec, shut the doors. Nobody
leaves here till we have ten dollars.
Calpurnia scratched in her handbag and brought forth a battered
leather coin purse. Naw Cal,Jem whispered, when she handed him a
shiny quarter, we can put ours in. Gimme your dime, Scout.
The church was becoming stuffy, and it occurred to me that
Reverend Sykes intended to sweat the amount due out of his flock.
Fans crackled, feet shuffled, tobacco-chewers were in agony.
Reverend Sykes startled me by saying sternly, Carlow Richardson,
I havent seen you up this aisle yet.
A thin man in khaki pants came up the aisle and deposited a coin.
The congregation murmured approval.
Reverend Sykes then said, I want all of you with no children to
make a sacrifice and give one more dime apiece. Then well have it.
Slowly, painfully, the ten dollars was collected. The door was
opened, and the gust of warm air revived us. Zeebo lined On Jordans
Stormy Banks, and church was over.
I wanted to stay and explore, but Calpurnia propelled me up the
aisle ahead of her. At the church door, while she paused to talk with
Zeebo and his family, Jem and I chatted with Reverend Sykes. I was
bursting with questions, but decided I would wait and let Calpurnia
answer them.
We were specially glad to have you all here, said Reverend Sykes.
This church has no better friend than your daddy.
My curiosity burst: Why were you all takin up collection for Tom
Robinsons wife?
Didnt you hear why? asked Reverend Sykes. Helens got three
littleuns and she cant go out to work
Why cant she take em with her, Reverend? I asked. It was
customary for field Negroes with tiny children to deposit them in
whatever shade there was while their parents workedusually the
babies sat in the shade between two rows of cotton. Those unable to sit
were strapped papoose-style on their mothers backs, or resided in
extra cotton bags.
Reverend Sykes hesitated. To tell you the truth, Miss Jean Louise,
Helens finding it hard to get work these days... when its picking time,
I think Mr. Link Deasll take her.
Why not, Reverend?
Before he could answer, I felt Calpurnias hand on my shoulder. At
its pressure I said, We thank you for lettin us come. Jem echoed me,
and we made our way homeward.
Cal, I know Tom Robinsons in jail an hes done somethin awful,
but why wont folks hire Helen? I asked.
Calpurnia, in her navy voile dress and tub of a hat, walked between
Jem and me. Its because of what folks say Toms done, she said.
Folks arent anxious toto have anything to do with any of his family.
Just what did he do, Cal?
Calpurnia sighed. Old Mr. Bob Ewell accused him of rapin his girl
an had him arrested an put in jail
Mr. Ewell? My memory stirred. Does he have anything to do
with those Ewells that come every first day of school an then go home?
Why, Atticus said they were absolute trashI never heard Atticus talk
about folks the way he talked about the Ewells. He said
Yeah, those are the ones.
Well, if everybody in Maycomb knows what kind of folks the
Ewells are theyd be glad to hire Helen... whats rape, Cal?
Its somethin youll have to ask Mr. Finch about, she said. He
can explain it better than I can. You all hungry? The Reverend took a
long time unwindin this morning, hes not usually so tedious.
Hes just like our preacher, said Jem, but why do you all sing
hymns that way?
Linin? she asked.
Is that what it is?
Yeah, its called linin. Theyve done it that way as long as I can
remember.
Jem said it looked like they could save the collection money for a
year and get some hymn-books.
Calpurnia laughed. Wouldnt do any good, she said. They cant
read.
Cant read? I asked. All those folks?
Thats right, Calpurnia nodded. Cant but about four folks in
First Purchase read... Im one of em.
Whered you go to school, Cal? asked Jem.
Nowhere. Lets see now, who taught me my letters? It was Miss
Maudie Atkinsons aunt, old Miss Buford
Are you that old?
Im older than Mr. Finch, even. Calpurnia grinned. Not sure how
much, though. We started rememberinone time, trying to figure out
how old I wasI can remember back just a few years moren he can, so
Im not much older, when you take off the fact that men cant
remember as well as women.
Whats your birthday, Cal?
I just have it on Christmas, its easier to remember that wayI
dont have a real birthday.
But Cal, Jem protested, you dont look even near as old as
Atticus.
Colored folks dont show their ages so fast, she said.
Maybe because they cant read. Cal, did you teach Zeebo?
Yeah, Mister Jem. There wasnt a school even when he was a boy. I
made him learn, though.
Zeebo was Calpurnias eldest son. If I had ever thought about it, I
would have known that Calpurnia was of mature yearsZeebo had
half-grown childrenbut then I had never thought about it.
Did you teach him out of a primer, like us? I asked.
No, I made him get a page of the Bible every day, and there was a
book Miss Buford taught me out ofbet you dont know where I got it,
she said.
We didnt know.
Calpurnia said, Your Granddaddy Finch gave it to me.
Were you from the Landing? Jem asked. You never told us that.
I certainly am, Mister Jem. Grew up down there between the
Buford Place and the Landin. Ive spent all my days workin for the
Finches or the Bufords, an I moved to Maycomb when your daddy and
your mamma married.
What was the book, Cal? I asked.
Blackstones Commentaries.
Jem was thunderstruck. You mean you taught Zeebo outa that?
Why yes sir, Mister Jem.Calpurnia timidly put her fingers to her
mouth. They were the only books I had. Your grandaddy said Mr.
Blackstone wrote fine English
Thats why you dont talk like the rest of em, said Jem.
The rest of who?
Rest of the colored folks. Cal, but you talked like they did in
church....
That Calpurnia led a modest double life neverdawned on me. The
idea that she had a separate existence outside our household was a
novel one, to say nothing of her having command of two languages.
Cal, I asked, why do you talk nigger-talk to theto your folks
when you know its not right?
Well, in the first place Im black
That doesnt mean you hafta talk that way when you know better,
said Jem.
Calpurnia tilted her hat and scratched her head, then pressed her
hat down carefully over her ears. Its right hard to say, she said.
Suppose you and Scout talked colored-folks talk at home itd be out of
place, wouldnt it? Now what if I talked white-folks talk at church, and
with my neighbors? Theyd think I was puttin on airs to beat Moses.
But Cal, you know better, I said.
Its not necessary to tell all you know. Its not ladylikein the
second place, folks dont like to have somebody around knowin more
than they do. It aggravates em. Youre not gonna change any of them
by talkin right, theyve got to want to learn themselves, and when they
dont want to learn theres nothing you can do but keep your mouth
shut or talk their language.
Cal, can I come to see you sometimes?
She looked down at me. See me, honey? You see me every day.
Out to your house, I said. Sometimes after work? Atticus can get
me.
Any time you want to, she said. Wed be glad to have you.
We were on the sidewalk by the Radley Place.
Look on the porch yonder, Jem said.
I looked over to the Radley Place, expecting to see its phantom
occupant sunning himself in the swing. The swing was empty.
I mean our porch, said Jem.
I looked down the street. Enarmored, upright, uncompromising,
Aunt Alexandra was sitting in a rocking chair exactly as if she had sat
there every day of her life.
13
Put my bag in the front bedroom, Calpurnia, was the first thing
Aunt Alexandra said. Jean Louise, stop scratching your head, was the
second thing she said.
Calpurnia picked up Auntys heavy suitcase and opened the door.
Ill take it, said Jem, and took it. I heard the suitcase hit the bedroom
floor with a thump. The sound had a dull permanence about it.
Have you come for a visit, Aunty? I asked. Aunt Alexandras visits
from the Landing were rare, and she traveled in state. She owned a
bright green square Buick and a black chauffeur, both kept in an
unhealthy state of tidiness, but today they were nowhere to be seen.
Didnt your father tell you? she asked.
Jem and I shook our heads.
Probably he forgot. Hes not in yet, is he?
Nome, he doesnt usually get back till late afternoon, said Jem.
Well, your father and I decided it was time I came to stay with you
for a while.
For a while in Maycomb meant anything from three days to thirty
years. Jem and I exchanged glances.
Jems growing up now and you are too, she said to me. We
decided that it would be best for you to have some feminine influence.
It wont be many years, Jean Louise, before you become interested in
clothes and boys
I could have made several answers to this: Cals a girl, it would be
many years before I would be interested in boys, I would never be
interested in clothes... but I kept quiet.
What about Uncle Jimmy? asked Jem. Is he comin, too?
Oh no, hes staying at the Landing. Hell keep the place going.
The moment I said, Wont you miss him? I realized that this was
not a tactful question. Uncle Jimmy present or Uncle Jimmy absent
made not much difference, he never said anything. Aunt Alexandra
ignored my question.
I could think of nothing else to say to her. In fact I could never
think of anything to say to her, and I sat thinking of past painful
conversations between us: How are you, Jean Louise? Fine, thank you
maam, how are you? Very well, thank you, what have you been doing
with yourself? Nothin. Dont you do anything? Nome. Certainly you
have friends? Yessum. Well what do you all do? Nothin.
It was plain that Aunty thought me dull in the extreme, because I
once heard her tell Atticus that I was sluggish.
There was a story behind all this, but I had no desire to extract it
from her then. Today was Sunday, and Aunt Alexandra was positively
irritable on the Lords Day. I guess it was her Sunday corset. She was
not fat, but solid, and she chose protective garments that drew up her
bosom to giddy heights, pinched in her waist, flared out her rear, and
managed to suggest that Aunt Alexandras was once an hour-glass
figure. From any angle, it was formidable.
The remainder of the afternoon went by in the gentle gloom that
descends when relatives appear, but was dispelled when we heard a car
turn in the driveway. It was Atticus, home from Montgomery. Jem,
forgetting his dignity, ran with me to meet him. Jem seized his
briefcase and bag, I jumped into his arms, felt his vague dry kiss and
said, d you bring me a book? d you know Auntys here?
Atticus answered both questions in the affirmative. Howd you like
for her to come live with us?
I said I would like it very much, which was a lie, but one must lie
under certain circumstances and at all times when one cant do
anything about them.
We felt it was time you children neededwell, its like this, Scout,
Atticus said. Your aunts doing me a favor as well as you all. I cant
stay here all day with you, and the summers going to be a hot one.
Yes sir, I said, not understanding a word he said. I had an idea,
however, that Aunt Alexandras appearance on the scene was not so
much Atticuss doing as hers. Aunty had a way of declaring What Is
Best For The Family, and I suppose her coming to live with us was in
that category.
Maycomb welcomed her. Miss Maudie Atkinson baked a Lane cake
so loaded with shinny it made me tight; Miss Stephanie Crawford had
long visits with Aunt Alexandra, consisting mostly of Miss Stephanie
shaking her head and saying, Uh, uh, uh.Miss Rachel next door had
Aunty over for coffee in the afternoons, and Mr. Nathan Radley went so
far as to come up in the front yard and say he was glad to see her.
When she settled in with us and life resumed its daily pace, Aunt
Alexandra seemed as if she had always lived with us. Her Missionary
Society refreshments added to her reputation as a hostess (she did not
permit Calpurnia to make the delicacies required to sustain the Society
through long reports on Rice Christians); she joined and became
Secretary of the Maycomb Amanuensis Club. To all parties present and
participating in the life of the county, Aunt Alexandra was one of the
last of her kind: she had river-boat, boarding-school manners; let any
moral come along and she would uphold it; she was born in the
objective case; she was an incurable gossip. When Aunt Alexandra
went to school, self-doubt could not be found in any textbook, so she
knew not its meaning. She was never bored, and given the slightest
chance she would exercise her royal prerogative: she would arrange,
advise, caution, and warn.
She never let a chance escape her to point out the shortcomings of
other tribal groups to the greater glory of our own, a habit that amused
Jem rather than annoyed him: Aunty better watch how she talksscratch
most folks in Maycomb and theyre kin to us.
Aunt Alexandra, in underlining the moral of young Sam
Merriweathers suicide, said it was caused by a morbid streak in the
family. Let a sixteen-year-old girl giggle in the choir and Aunty would
say, It just goes to show you, all the Penfield women are flighty.
Everybody in Maycomb, it seemed, had a Streak: a Drinking Streak, a
Gambling Streak, a Mean Streak, a Funny Streak.
Once, when Aunty assured us that Miss Stephanie Crawfords
tendency to mind other peoples business was hereditary, Atticus said,
Sister, when you stop to think about it, our generations practically the
first in the Finch family not to marry its cousins. Would you say the
Finches have an Incestuous Streak?
Aunty said no, thats where we got our small hands and feet.
I never understood her preoccupation with heredity. Somewhere, I
had received the impression that Fine Folks were people who did the
best they could with the sense they had, but Aunt Alexandra was of the
opinion, obliquely expressed, that the longer a family had been
squatting on one patch of land the finer it was.
That makes the Ewells fine folks, then,said Jem. The tribe of
which Burris Ewell and his brethren consisted had lived on the same
plot of earth behind the Maycomb dump, and had thrived on county
welfare money for three generations.
Aunt Alexandras theory had something behind it, though.
Maycomb was an ancient town. It was twenty miles east of Finchs
Landing, awkwardly inland for such an old town. But Maycomb would
have been closer to the river had it not been for the nimble-wittedness
of one Sinkfield, who in the dawn of history operated an inn where two
pig-trails met, the only tavern in the territory. Sinkfield, no patriot,
served and supplied ammunition to Indians and settlers alike, neither
knowing or caring whether he was a part of the Alabama Territory or
the Creek Nation so long as business was good. Business was excellent
when Governor William Wyatt Bibb, with a view to promoting the
newly created countys domestic tranquility, dispatched a team of
surveyors to locate its exact center and there establish its seat of
government. The surveyors, Sinkfields guests, told their host that he
was in the territorial confines of Maycomb County, and showed him
the probable spot where the county seat would be built. Had not
Sinkfield made a bold stroke to preserve his holdings, Maycomb would
have sat in the middle of Winston Swamp, a place totally devoid of
interest. Instead, Maycomb grew and sprawled out from its hub,
Sinkfields Tavern, because Sinkfield reduced his guests to myopic
drunkenness one evening, induced them to bring forward their maps
and charts, lop off a little here, add a bit there, and adjust the center of
the county to meet his requirements. He sent them packing next day
armed with their charts and five quarts of shinny in their saddlebags
two apiece and one for the Governor.
Because its primary reason for existence was government,
Maycomb was spared the grubbiness that distinguished most Alabama
towns its size. In the beginning its buildings were solid, its courthouse
proud, its streets graciously wide. Maycombs proportion of
professional people ran high: one went there to have his teeth pulled,
his wagon fixed, his heart listened to, his money deposited, his soul
saved, his mules vetted. But the ultimate wisdom of Sinkfields
maneuver is open to question. He placed the young town too far away
from the only kind of public transportation in those daysriver-boat
and it took a man from the north end of the county two days to travel to
Maycomb for store-bought goods. As a result the town remained the
same size for a hundred years, an island in a patchwork sea of
cottonfields and timberland.
Although Maycomb was ignored during the War Between the
States, Reconstruction rule and economic ruin forced the town to grow.
It grew inward. New people so rarely settled there, the same families
married the same families until the members of the community looked
faintly alike. Occasionally someone would return from Montgomery or
Mobile with an outsider, but the result caused only a ripple in the quiet
stream of family resemblance. Things were more or less the same
during my early years.
There was indeed a caste system in Maycomb, but to my mind it
worked this way: the older citizens, the present generation of people
who had lived side by side for years and years, were utterly predictable
to one another: they took for granted attitudes, character shadings,
even gestures, as having been repeated in each generation and refined
by time. Thus the dicta No Crawford Minds His Own Business, Every
Third Merriweather Is Morbid, The Truth Is Not in the Delafields, All
the Bufords Walk Like That, were simply guides to daily living: never
take a check from a Delafield without a discreet call to the bank; Miss
Maudie Atkinsons shoulder stoops because she was a Buford; if Mrs.
Grace Merriweather sips gin out of Lydia E. Pinkham bottles its
nothing unusualher mother did the same.
Aunt Alexandra fitted into the world of Maycomb like a hand into a
glove, but never intothe world of Jem and me. I so often wondered
how she could be Atticuss and Uncle Jacks sister that I revived halfremembered
tales of changelings and mandrake roots that Jem had
spun long ago.
These were abstract speculations for the first month of her stay, as
she had little to say to Jem or me, and we saw her only at mealtimes
and at night before we went to bed. It was summer and we were
outdoors. Of course some afternoons when I would run inside for a
drink of water, I would find the livingroom overrun with Maycomb
ladies, sipping, whispering, fanning, and I would be called: Jean
Louise, come speak to these ladies.
When I appeared in the doorway, Aunty would look as if she
regretted her request; I was usually mud-splashed or covered with
sand.
Speak to your Cousin Lily,she said one afternoon, when she had
trapped me in the hall.
Who? I said.
Your Cousin Lily Brooke, said Aunt Alexandra.
She our cousin? I didnt know that.
Aunt Alexandra managed to smile in a way that conveyed a gentle
apologyto Cousin Lily and firm disapproval to me. When Cousin Lily
Brooke left I knew I was in for it.
It was a sad thing that my father had neglected to tell me about the
Finch Family, or to install any pride into his children. She summoned
Jem, who sat warily on the sofa beside me. She left the room and
returned with a purple-covered book on which Meditations of Joshua
S. St. Clair was stamped in gold.
Your cousin wrote this, said Aunt Alexandra. He was a beautiful
character.
Jem examined the small volume. Is this the Cousin Joshua who
was locked up for so long?
Aunt Alexandra said, How did you know that?
Why, Atticus said he went round the bend at the University. Said
he tried to shoot the president. Said Cousin Joshua said he wasnt
anything but a sewer-inspector and tried to shoot him with an old
flintlock pistol, only it just blew up in his hand. Atticus said it cost the
family five hundred dollars to get him out of that one
Aunt Alexandra was standing stiff as a stork. Thats all, she said.
Well see about this.
Before bedtime I was in Jems room trying to borrow a book, when
Atticus knocked and entered. He sat on the side of Jems bed, looked at
us soberly, then he grinned.
Erhrm,he said. He was beginning to preface some things he
said with a throaty noise, and I thought he must at last be getting old,
but he looked the same. I dont exactly know how to say this, he
began.
Well, just say it, said Jem. Have we done something?
Our father was actually fidgeting. No, I just want to explain to you
thatyour Aunt Alexandra asked me... son, you know youre a Finch,
dont you?
Thats what Ive been told.Jem looked out of the corners of his
eyes. His voice rose uncontrollably, Atticus, whats the matter?
Atticus crossed his knees and folded his arms. Im trying to tell
you the facts of life.
Jems disgust deepened. I know all that stuff, he said.
Atticus suddenly grew serious. In his lawyers voice, without a
shade of inflection, he said: Your aunt has asked me to try and
impress upon you and Jean Louise that you are not from run-of-themill
people, that you are the product of several generations gentle
breedingAtticus paused, watching me locate an elusive redbug on
my leg.
Gentle breeding,he continued, when I had found and scratched
it, and that you should try to live up to your name Atticus
persevered in spite of us: She asked me to tell you you must try to
behave like the little lady and gentleman that you are. She wants to talk
to you about the family and what its meant to Maycomb County
through the years, so youll have some idea of who you are, so you
might be moved to behave accordingly, he concluded at a gallop.
Stunned, Jem and I looked at each other, then at Atticus, whose
collar seemed to worry him. We did not speak to him.
Presently I picked up a comb from Jems dresser and ran its teeth
along the edge.
Stop that noise, Atticus said.
His curtness stung me. The comb was midway in its journey, and I
banged it down. For no reason I felt myself beginning to cry, but I
could not stop. This was not my father. My father never thought these
thoughts. My father never spoke so. Aunt Alexandra had put him up to
this, somehow. Through my tears I saw Jem standing in a similar pool
of isolation, his head cocked to one side.
There was nowhere to go, but I turned to go and met Atticuss vest
front. I buried my head in it and listened to the small internal noises
that went on behind the light blue cloth: his watch ticking, the faint
crackle of his starched shirt, the soft sound of his breathing.
Your stomachs growling, I said.
I know it, he said.
You better take some soda.
I will, he said.
Atticus, is all this behavin an stuff gonna make things different? I
mean are you-?
I felt his hand on the back of my head. Dont you worry about
anything, he said. Its not time to worry.
When I heard that, I knew he had come back to us. The blood in my
legs began to flow again, and I raised my head. You really want us to
do all that? I cant remember everything Finches are supposed to do....
I dont want you to remember it. Forget it.
He went to the door and out of the room, shutting the door behind
him. He nearly slammed it, but caught himself at the last minute and
closed it softly. As Jem and I stared, the door opened again and Atticus
peered around. His eyebrows were raised, his glasses had slipped. Get
more like Cousin Joshua every day, dont I? Do you think Ill end up
costing the family five hundred dollars?
I know now what he was trying to do, but Atticus was only a man. It
takes a woman to do that kind of work.
14
Although we heard no more about the Finch family from Aunt
Alexandra, we heard plenty from the town. On Saturdays, armed with
our nickels, when Jem permitted me to accompany him (he was now
positively allergic to my presence when in public), we would squirm
our way through sweating sidewalk crowds and sometimes hear,
Theres his chillun, or, Yonders some Finches.Turning to face our
accusers, we would see only a couple of farmers studying the enema
bags in the Mayco Drugstore window. Or two dumpy countrywomen in
straw hats sitting in a Hoover cart.
They cn go loose and rape up the countryside for all of em who
run this county care, was one obscure observation we met head on
from a skinny gentleman when he passed us. Which reminded me that
I had a question to ask Atticus.
Whats rape? I asked him that night.
Atticus looked around from behind his paper. He was in his chair
by the window. As we grew older, Jem and I thought it generous to
allow Atticus thirty minutes to himself after supper.
He sighed, and said rape was carnal knowledge of a female by force
and without consent.
Well if thats all it is why did Calpurnia dry me up when I asked
her what it was?
Atticus looked pensive. Whats that again?
Well, I asked Calpurnia cominfrom church that day what it was
and she said ask you but I forgot to and now Im askin you.
His paper was now in his lap. Again, please, he said.
I told him in detail about our trip to church with Calpurnia. Atticus
seemed to enjoy it, but Aunt Alexandra, who was sitting in a corner
quietly sewing, put down her embroidery and stared at us.
You all were coming back from Calpurnias church that Sunday?
Jem said, Yessum, she took us.
I remembered something. Yessum, and she promised me I could
come out to her house some afternoon. Atticus. Ill go next Sunday if
its all right, can I? Cal said shed come get me if you were off in the
car.
You may not.
Aunt Alexandra said it. I wheeled around, startled, then turned
back to Atticus in time to catch his swift glance at her, but it was too
late. I said, I didnt ask you!
For a big man, Atticus could get up and down from a chair faster
than anyone I ever knew. He was on his feet. Apologize to your aunt,
he said.
I didnt ask her, I asked you
Atticus turned his head and pinned me to the wall with his good
eye. His voice was deadly: First, apologize to your aunt.
Im sorry, Aunty, I muttered.
Now then, he said. Lets get this clear: you do as Calpurnia tells
you, you do as I tell you, and as long as your aunts in this house, you
will do as she tells you. Understand?
I understood, pondered a while, and concluded that the only way I
could retire with a shred of dignity was to go to the bathroom, where I
stayed long enough to make them think I had to go. Returning, I
lingered in the hall to hear a fierce discussion going on in the
livingroom. Through the door I could see Jem on the sofa with a
football magazine in front of his face, his head turning as if its pages
contained a live tennis match.
...youve got to do something about her, Aunty was saying.
Youve let things go on too long, Atticus, too long.
I dont see any harm in letting her go out there. Cald look after her
there as well as she does here.
Who was the herthey were talking about? My heart sank: me. I
felt the starched walls of a pink cotton penitentiary closing in on me,
and for the second time in my life I thought of running away.
Immediately.
Atticus, its all right to be soft-hearted, youre an easy man, but
you have a daughter to think of. A daughter whos growing up.
Thats what I am thinking of.
And dont try to get around it. Youve got to face it sooner or later
and it might as well be tonight. We dont need her now.
Atticuss voice was even: Alexandra, Calpurnias not leaving this
house until she wants to. You may think otherwise, but I couldnt have
got along without her all these years. Shes a faithful member of this
family and youll simply have to accept things the way they are.
Besides, sister, I dont want you working your head off for usyouve
no reason to do that. We still need Cal as much as we ever did.
But Atticus
Besides, I dont think the childrenve suffered one bit from her
having brought them up. If anything, shes been harder on them in
some ways than a mother would have been... shes never let them get
away with anything, shes never indulged them the way most colored
nurses do. She tried to bring them up according to her lights, and Cals
lights are pretty goodand another thing, the children love her.
I breathed again. It wasnt me, it was only Calpurnia they were
talking about. Revived, I entered the livingroom. Atticus had retreated
behind his newspaper and Aunt Alexandra was worrying her
embroidery. Punk, punk, punk, her needle broke the taut circle. She
stopped, and pulled the cloth tighter: punk-punk-punk. She was
furious.
Jem got up and padded across the rug. He motioned me to follow.
He led me to his room and closed the door. His face was grave.
Theyve been fussing, Scout.
Jem and I fussed a great deal these days, but I had never heard of
or seen anyone quarrel with Atticus. It was not a comfortable sight.
Scout, try not to antagonize Aunty, hear?
Atticuss remarks were still rankling, which made me miss the
request in Jems question. My feathers rose again. You tryin to tell me
what to do?
Naw, itshes got a lot on his mind now, without us worrying
him.
Like what? Atticus didnt appear to have anything especially on
his mind.
Its this Tom Robinson case thats worryin him to death
I said Atticus didnt worry about anything. Besides, the case never
bothered us except about once a week and then it didnt last.
Thats because you cant hold something in your mind but a little
while, said Jem. Its different with grown folks, we
His maddening superiority was unbearable these days. He didnt
want to do anything but read and go off by himself. Still, everything he
read he passed along to me, but with this difference: formerly, because
he thought Id like it; now, for my edification and instruction.
Jee crawling hova, Jem! Who do you think you are?
Now I mean it, Scout, you antagonize Aunty and IllIll spank
you.
With that, I was gone. You damn morphodite, Ill kill you! He was
sitting on the bed, and it was easy to grab his front hair and land one
on his mouth. He slapped me and I tried another left, but a punch in
the stomach sent me sprawling on the floor. It nearly knocked the
breath out of me, but it didnt matter because I knew he was fighting,
he was fighting me back. We were still equals.
Aint so high and mighty now, are you! I screamed, sailing in
again. He was still on the bed and I couldnt get a firm stance, so I
threw myself at him as hard as I could, hitting, pulling, pinching,
gouging. What had begun as a fist-fight became a brawl. We were still
struggling when Atticus separated us.
Thats all, he said. Both of you go to bed right now.
Taah! I said at Jem. He was being sent to bed at my bedtime.
Who started it? asked Atticus, in resignation.
Jem did. He was tryinto tell me what to do. I dont have to mind
him now, do I?
Atticus smiled. Lets leave it at this: you mind Jem whenever he
can make you. Fair enough?
Aunt Alexandra was present but silent, and when she went down
the hall with Atticus we heard her say, ...just one of the things Ive
been telling you about, a phrase that united us again.
Ours were adjoining rooms; as I shut the door between them Jem
said, Night, Scout.
Night, I murmured, picking my way across the room to turn on
the light. As I passed the bed I stepped on something warm, resilient,
and rather smooth. It was not quite like hard rubber, and I had the
sensation that it was alive. I also heard it move.
I switched on the light and looked at the floor by the bed. Whatever
I had stepped on was gone. I tapped on Jems door.
What, he said.
How does a snake feel?
Sort of rough. Cold. Dusty. Why?
I think theres one under my bed. Can you come look?
Are you bein funny? Jem opened the door. He was in his pajama
bottoms. I noticed not without satisfaction that the mark of my
knuckles was still on his mouth. When he saw I meant what I said, he
said, If you think Im gonna put my face down to a snake youve got
another think comin. Hold on a minute.
He went to the kitchen and fetched the broom. You better get up
on the bed, he said.
You reckon its really one?I asked. This was an occasion. Our
houses had no cellars; they were built on stone blocks a few feet above
the ground, and the entry of reptiles was not unknown but was not
commonplace. Miss Rachel Haverfords excuse for a glass of neat
whiskey every morning was that she never got over the fright of finding
a rattler coiled in her bedroom closet, on her washing, when she went
to hang up her negligee.
Jem made a tentative swipe under the bed. I looked over the foot to
see if a snake would come out. None did. Jem made a deeper swipe.
Do snakes grunt?
It aint a snake, Jem said. Its somebody.
Suddenly a filthy brown package shot from under the bed. Jem
raised the broom and missed Dills head by an inch when it appeared.
God Almighty. Jems voice was reverent.
We watched Dill emerge by degrees. He was a tight fit. He stood up
and eased his shoulders, turned his feet in their ankle sockets, rubbed
the back of his neck. His circulation restored, he said, Hey.
Jem petitioned God again. I was speechless.
Im bout to perish, said Dill. Got anything to eat?
In a dream, I went to the kitchen. I brought him back some milk
and half a pan of corn bread left over from supper. Dill devoured it,
chewing with his front teeth, as was his custom.
I finally found my voice. Howd you get here?
By an involved route. Refreshed by food, Dill recited this narrative:
having beenbound in chains and left to die in the basement (there
were basements in Meridian) by his new father, who disliked him, and
secretly kept alive on raw field peas by a passing farmer who heard his
cries for help (the good man poked a bushel pod by pod through the
ventilator), Dill worked himself free by pulling the chains from the
wall. Still in wrist manacles, he wandered two miles out of Meridian
where he discovered a small animal show and was immediately
engaged to wash the camel. He traveled with the show all over
Mississippi until his infallible sense of direction told him he was in
Abbott County, Alabama, just across the river from Maycomb. He
walked the rest of the way.
Howd you get here? asked Jem.
He had taken thirteen dollars from his mothers purse, caught the
nine oclock from Meridian and got off at Maycomb Junction. He had
walked ten or eleven of the fourteen miles to Maycomb, off the highway
in the scrub bushes lest the authorities be seeking him, and had ridden
the remainder of the way clinging to the backboard of a cotton wagon.
He had been under the bed for two hours, he thought; he had heard us
in the diningroom, and the clink of forks on plates nearly drove him
crazy. He thought Jem and I would never go to bed; he had considered
emerging and helping me beat Jem, as Jem had grown far taller, but he
knew Mr. Finch would break it up soon, so he thought it best to stay
where he was. He was worn out, dirty beyond belief, and home.
They must not know youre here, said Jem. Wed know if they
were lookin for you....
Think theyre still searchin all the picture shows in Meridian. Dill
grinned.
You oughta let your mother know where you are, said Jem. You
oughta let her know youre here....
Dills eyes flickered at Jem, and Jem looked at the floor. Then he
rose and broke the remaining code of our childhood. He went out of the
room and down the hall. Atticus, his voice was distant, can you come
here a minute, sir?
Beneath its sweat-streaked dirt Dills face went white. I felt sick.
Atticus was in the doorway.
He came to the middle of the room and stood with his hands in his
pockets, looking down at Dill.
I finally found my voice: Its okay, Dill. When he wants you to
know somethin, he tells you.
Dill looked at me. I mean its all right, I said. You know he
wouldnt bother you, you know you aint scared of Atticus.
Im not scared... Dill muttered.
Just hungry, Ill bet. Atticuss voice had its usual pleasant
dryness. Scout, we can do better than a pan of cold corn bread, cant
we? You fill this fellow up and when I get back well see what we can
see.
Mr. Finch, dont tell Aunt Rachel, dont make me go back, please
sir! Ill run off again-!
Whoa, son, said Atticus. Nobodys about to make you go
anywhere but to bed pretty soon. Im just going over to tell Miss Rachel
youre here and ask her if you could spend the night with usyoud like
that, wouldnt you? And for goodness sake put some of the county back
where it belongs, the soil erosions bad enough as it is.
Dill stared at my fathers retreating figure.
Hes tryin to be funny, I said. He means take a bath. See there, I
told you he wouldnt bother you.
Jem was standing in a corner of the room, looking like the traitor
he was. Dill, I had to tell him, he said. You cant run three hundred
miles off without your mother knowin.
We left him without a word.
Dill ate, and ate, and ate. He hadnt eaten since last night. He used
all his money for a ticket, boarded the train as he had done many times,
coolly chatted with the conductor, to whom Dill was a familiar sight,
but he had not the nerve to invoke the rule on small children traveling
a distance alone if youve lost your money the conductor will lend you
enough for dinner and your father will pay him back at the end of the
line.
Dill made his way through the leftovers and was reaching for a can
of pork and beans in the pantry when Miss Rachels Do-oo Je-sus went
off in the hall. He shivered like a rabbit.
He bore with fortitude her Wait Till I Get You Home, Your Folks
Are Out of Their Minds Worryin, was quite calm during Thats All the
Harris in You Coming Out, smiled at her Reckon You Can Stay One
Night, and returned the hug at long last bestowed upon him.
Atticus pushed up his glasses and rubbed his face.
Your fathers tired, said Aunt Alexandra, her first words in hours,
it seemed. She had been there, but I suppose struck dumb most of the
time. You children get to bed now.
We left them in the diningroom, Atticus still mopping his face.
From rape to riot to runaways, we heard him chuckle. I wonder what
the next two hours will bring.
Since things appeared to have worked out pretty well, Dill and I
decided to be civil to Jem. Besides, Dill had to sleep with him so we
might as well speak to him.
I put on my pajamas, read for a while and found myself suddenly
unable to keep my eyes open. Dill and Jem were quiet; when I turned
off my reading lamp there was no strip of light under the door to Jems
room.
I must have slept a long time, for when I was punched awake the
room was dim with the light of the setting moon.
Move over, Scout.
He thought he had to, I mumbled. Dont stay mad with him.
Dill got in bed beside me. I aint, he said. I just wanted to sleep
with you. Are you waked up?
By this time I was, but lazily so. Whyd you do it?
No answer. I said whyd you run off? Was he really hateful like you
said?
Naw...
Didnt you all build that boat like you wrote you were gonna?
He just said we would. We never did.
I raised up on my elbow, facing Dills outline. Its no reason to run
off. They dont get around to doin what they say theyre gonna do half
the time....
That wasnt it, hethey just wasnt interested in me.
This was the weirdest reason for flight I had ever heard. How
come?
Well, they stayed gone all the time, and when they were home,
even, theyd get off in a room by themselves.
Whatd they do in there?
Nothin, just sittin and readinbut they didnt want me with
em.
I pushed the pillow to the headboard and sat up. You know
something? I was fixin to run off tonight because there they all were.
You dont want em around you all the time, Dill
Dill breathed his patient breath, a half-sigh.
-good night, Atticuss gone all day and sometimes half the night
and off in the legislature and I dont know whatyou dont want em
around all the time, Dill, you couldnt do anything if they were.
Thats not it.
As Dill explained, I found myself wondering what life would be if
Jem were different, even from what he was now; what I woulddo if
Atticus did not feel the necessity of my presence, help and advice. Why,
he couldnt get along a day without me. Even Calpurnia couldnt get
along unless I was there. They needed me.
Dill, you aint telling me rightyour folks couldnt do without you.
They must be just mean to you. Tell you what to do about that
Dills voice went on steadily in the darkness: The thing is, what Im
tryin to say isthey do get on a lot better without me, I cant help them
any. They aint mean. They buy me everything I want, but its nowyouve-
got-it-go-play-with-it. Youve got a roomful of things. I-got-youthat-
book-so-go-read-it.Dill tried to deepen his voice. Youre not a
boy. Boys get out and play baseball with other boys, they dont hang
around the house worryin their folks.
Dills voice was his own again: Oh, they aint mean. They kiss you
and hug you good night and good mornin and good-bye and tell you
they love youScout, lets get us a baby.
Where?
There was a man Dill had heard of who had a boatthat he rowed
across to a foggy island where all these babies were; you could order
one
Thats a lie. Aunty said God drops em down the chimney. At least
thats what I think she said. For once, Auntys diction had not been too
clear.
Well that aint so. You get babies from each other. But theres this
man, toohe has all these babies just waitin to wake up, he breathes
life into em....
Dill was off again. Beautiful things floated around in his dreamy
head. He could read two books to my one, but he preferred the magic of
his own inventions. He could add and subtract faster than lightning,
but he preferred his own twilight world, a world where babies slept,
waiting to be gathered like morning lilies. He was slowly talking
himself to sleep and taking mewith him, but in the quietness of his
foggy island there rose the faded image of a gray house with sad brown
doors.
Dill?
Mm?
Why do you reckon Boo Radleys never run off?
Dill sighed a long sigh and turned away from me.
Maybe he doesnt have anywhere to run off to....
15
After many telephone calls, much pleading on behalf of the
defendant, and a long forgiving letter from his mother, it was decided
that Dill could stay. We had a week of peace together. After that, little,
it seemed. A nightmare was upon us.
It began one evening after supper. Dill was over; Aunt Alexandra
was in her chair in the corner, Atticus was in his; Jem and I were on the
floor reading. It had been a placid week: I had minded Aunty; Jem had
outgrown the treehouse, but helped Dill and me construct a new rope
ladder for it; Dill had hit upon a foolproof plan to make Boo Radley
come out at no cost to ourselves (place a trail of lemon drops from the
back door to the front yard and hed follow it, like an ant). There was a
knock on the front door, Jem answered it and said it was Mr. Heck
Tate.
Well, ask him to come in, said Atticus.
I already did. Theres some men outside in the yard, they want you
to come out.
In Maycomb, grown men stood outside in the front yard for only
two reasons: death and politics. I wondered who had died. Jem and I
went to the front door, but Atticus called, Go back in the house.
Jem turned out the livingroom lights and pressed his nose to a
window screen. Aunt Alexandra protested. Just for a second, Aunty,
lets see who it is, he said.
Dill and I took another window. A crowd of men was standing
around Atticus. They all seemed to be talking at once.
...movin him to the county jail tomorrow, Mr. Tate was saying, I
dont look for any trouble, but I cant guarantee there wont be any....
Dont be foolish, Heck, Atticus said. This is Maycomb.
...said I was just uneasy.
Heck, weve gotten one postponement of this case just to make
sure theres nothing to be uneasy about. This is Saturday, Atticus said.
Trialll probably be Monday. You can keep him one night, cant you? I
dont think anybody in Maycombll begrudge me a client, with times
this hard.
There was a murmur of glee that died suddenly when Mr. Link
Deas said, Nobody around heres up to anything, its that Old Sarum
bunch Im worried about... cant you get awhat is it, Heck?
Change of venue, said Mr. Tate. Not much point in that, now is
it?
Atticus said something inaudible. I turned to Jem, who waved me
to silence.
-besides, Atticus was saying, youre not scared of that crowd, are
you?
...know how they do when they get shinnied up.
They dont usually drink on Sunday, they go to church most of the
day... Atticus said.
This is a special occasion, though... someone said.
They murmured and buzzed until Aunty said if Jem didnt turn on
the livingroom lights he would disgrace the family. Jem didnt hear her.
-dont see why you touched it in the first place, Mr. Link Deas was
saying. Youve got everything to lose from this, Atticus. I mean
everything.
Do you really think so?
This was Atticuss dangerous question. Do you really think you
want to move there, Scout?Bam, bam, bam, and the checkerboard
was swept clean of my men. Do you really think that, son? Then read
this. Jem would struggle the rest of an evening through the speeches
of Henry W. Grady.
Link, that boy might go to the chair, but hes not going till the
truths told. Atticuss voice was even. And you know what the truth
is.
There was a murmur among the group of men, made more
ominous when Atticus moved back to the bottom front step and the
men drew nearer to him.
Suddenly Jem screamed, Atticus, the telephones ringing!
The men jumped a little and scattered; they were people we saw
every day: merchants, in-town farmers; Dr. Reynolds was there; so was
Mr. Avery.
Well, answer it, son, called Atticus.
Laughter broke them up. When Atticus switched on the overhead
light in the livingroom he found Jem at the window, pale except for the
vivid mark of the screen on his nose.
Why on earth are you all sitting in the dark? he asked.
Jem watched him go to his chair and pick up the evening paper. I
sometimes think Atticus subjected every crisis of his life to tranquil
evaluation behind The Mobile Register, The Birmingham News and
The Montgomery Advertiser.
They were after you, werent they? Jem went to him. They
wanted to get you, didnt they?
Atticus lowered the paper and gazed at Jem. What have you been
reading? he asked. Then he said gently, No son, those were our
friends.
It wasnt aa gang? Jem was looking from the corners of his eyes.
Atticus tried to stifle a smile but didnt make it. No, we dont have
mobs and that nonsense in Maycomb. Ive never heard of a gang in
Maycomb.
Ku Klux got after some Catholics one time.
Never heard of any Catholics in Maycomb either, said Atticus,
youre confusing that with something else. Way back about nineteentwenty
there was a Klan, but it was a political organization more than
anything. Besides, they couldnt find anybody to scare. They paraded
by Mr. Sam Levys house one night, but Sam just stood on his porch
and told em things had come to a pretty pass, hed sold em the very
sheets on their backs. Sam made em so ashamed of themselves they
went away.
The Levy family met all criteria for being Fine Folks: they did the
best they could with the sense they had, and they had been living on
the same plot of ground in Maycomb for five generations.
The Ku Kluxs gone, said Atticus. Itll never come back.
I walked home with Dill and returned in time to overhear Atticus
saying to Aunty, ...in favor of Southern womanhood as much as
anybody, but not for preserving polite fiction at the expense of human
life, a pronouncement that made me suspect they had been fussing
again.
I sought Jem and found him in his room, on the bed deep in
thought. Have they been at it? I asked.
Sort of. She wont let him alone about Tom Robinson. She almost
said Atticus was disgracin the family. Scout... Im scared.
Scareda what?
Scared about Atticus. Somebody might hurt him. Jem preferred
to remain mysterious; all he would say to my questions was go on and
leave him alone.
Next day was Sunday. In the interval between Sunday School and
Church when the congregation stretched its legs, I saw Atticus standing
in the yard with another knot of men. Mr. Heck Tate was present, and I
wondered if he had seen the light. He never went to church. Even Mr.
Underwood was there. Mr. Underwood had no use for any organization
but The Maycomb Tribune, of which he was the sole owner, editor, and
printer. His days were spent at his linotype, where he refreshed himself
occasionally from an ever-present gallon jug of cherry wine. He rarely
gathered news; people brought it to him. It was said that he made up
every edition of The Maycomb Tribune out of his own head and wrote
it down on the linotype. This was believable. Something must have
been up to haul Mr. Underwood out.
I caught Atticus coming in the door, and he said that theyd moved
Tom Robinson to the Maycomb jail. He also said, more to himself than
to me, that if theyd kept him there in the first place there wouldnt
have been any fuss. I watched him take his seat on the third row from
the front, and I heard him rumble, Nearer my God to thee, some
notes behind the rest of us. He never sat with Aunty, Jem and me. He
liked to be by himself in church.
The fake peace that prevailed on Sundays was made more irritating
by Aunt Alexandras presence. Atticus would flee to his office directly
after dinner, where if we sometimes looked in on him, we would find
him sitting back in his swivel chair reading. Aunt Alexandra composed
herself for a two-hour nap and dared us to make any noise in the yard,
the neighborhood was resting. Jem in his old age had taken to his room
with a stack of football magazines. So Dill and I spent our Sundays
creeping around in Deers Pasture.
Shooting on Sundays was prohibited, so Dill and I kicked Jems
football around the pasture for a while, which was no fun. Dill asked if
Id like to have a poke at Boo Radley. I said I didnt think itd be nice to
bother him, and spent the rest of the afternoon filling Dill in on last
winters events. He was considerably impressed.
We parted at suppertime, and after our meal Jem and I were
settling down to a routine evening, when Atticus did something that
interested us: he came into the livingroom carrying a long electrical
extension cord. There was a light bulb on the end.
Im going out for a while, he said. You folksll be in bed when I
come back, so Ill say good night now.
With that, he put his hat on and went out the back door.
Hes takin the car, said Jem.
Our father had a few peculiarities: one was, he never ate desserts;
another was that he liked to walk. As far back as I could remember,
there was always a Chevrolet in excellent condition in the carhouse,
and Atticus put many miles on it in business trips, but in Maycomb he
walked to and from his office four times a day, covering about two
miles. He said his only exercise was walking.In Maycomb, if one went
for a walk with no definite purpose in mind, it was correct to believe
ones mind incapable of definite purpose.
Later on, I bade my aunt and brother good night and was well into
a book when I heard Jem rattling around in his room.His go-to-bed
noises were so familiar to me that I knocked on his door: Why aint
you going to bed?
Im goin downtown for a while. He was changing his pants.
Why? Its almost ten oclock, Jem.
He knew it, but he was going anyway.
Then Im goin with you. If you say no youre not, Im goin
anyway, hear?
Jem saw that he would have to fight me to keep me home, and I
suppose he thought a fight would antagonize Aunty, so he gave in with
little grace.
I dressed quickly. We waited until Auntys light went out, and we
walked quietly down the back steps. There was no moon tonight.
Dillll wanta come, I whispered.
So he will, said Jem gloomily.
We leaped over the driveway wall, cut through Miss Rachels side
yard and went to Dills window. Jem whistled bob-white. Dills face
appeared at the screen, disappeared, and five minutes later he
unhooked the screen and crawled out. An old campaigner, he did not
speak until we were on the sidewalk. Whats up?
Jems got the look-arounds, an affliction Calpurnia said all boys
caught at his age.
Ive just got this feeling, Jem said, just this feeling.
We went by Mrs. Duboses house, standing empty and shuttered,
her camellias grown up in weeds and johnson grass. There were eight
more houses to the post office corner.
The south side of the square was deserted. Giant monkey-puzzle
bushes bristled on each corner, and between them an iron hitching rail
glistened under the street lights. A light shone in the county toilet,
otherwise that side of the courthouse was dark. A larger square of
stores surrounded the courthouse square; dim lights burned from deep
within them.
Atticuss office was in the courthouse when he began his law
practice, but after several years of it he moved to quieter quarters in the
Maycomb Bank building. When we rounded the corner of the square,
we saw the car parked in front of the bank. Hes in there, said Jem.
But he wasnt. His office was reached by a long hallway. Looking
down the hall, we should have seen Atticus Finch, Attorney-at-Law in
small sober letters against the light from behind his door. It was dark.
Jem peered in the bank door to make sure. He turned the knob.
The door was locked. Lets go up the street. Maybe hes visitin Mr.
Underwood.
Mr. Underwood not only ran The Maycomb Tribune office, he lived
in it. That is, above it. He covered the courthouse and jailhouse news
simply by looking out his upstairs window. The office building was on
the northwest corner of the square, and to reach it we had to pass the
jail.
The Maycomb jail was the most venerable and hideous of the
countys buildings. Atticus said it was like something Cousin Joshua St.
Clair might have designed. It was certainly someones dream. Starkly
out of place in a town of square-faced stores and steep-roofed houses,
the Maycomb jail was a miniature Gothic joke one cell wide and two
cells high, complete with tiny battlements and flying buttresses. Its
fantasy was heightened by its red brick facade and the thick steel bars
at its ecclesiastical windows. It stood on no lonely hill, but was wedged
between Tyndals Hardware Store and The Maycomb Tribune office.
The jail was Maycombs only conversation piece: its detractors said it
looked like a Victorian privy; its supporters said it gave the town a good
solid respectable look, and no stranger would ever suspect that it was
full of niggers.
As we walked up the sidewalk, we saw a solitary light burning in the
distance. Thats funny, said Jem, jail doesnt have an outside light.
Looks like its over the door, said Dill.
A long extension cord ran between the bars of a second-floor
window and down the side of the building. In the light from its bare
bulb, Atticus was sitting propped against the front door. He was sitting
in one of his office chairs, and he was reading, oblivious of the
nightbugs dancing over his head.
I made to run, but Jem caught me. Dont go to him, he said, he
might not like it. Hes all right, lets go home. I just wanted to see where
he was.
We were taking a short cut across the square when four dusty cars
came in from the Meridian highway, moving slowly in a line. They went
around the square, passed the bank building, and stopped in front of
the jail.
Nobody got out. We saw Atticus look up from his newspaper. He
closed it, folded it deliberately, dropped it in his lap, and pushed his
hat to the back of his head. He seemed to be expecting them.
Come on, whispered Jem. We streaked across the square, across
the street, until we were in the shelter of the Jitney Jungle door. Jem
peeked up the sidewalk. We can get closer, he said. We ran to
Tyndals Hardware doornear enough, at the same time discreet.
In ones and twos, men got out of the cars. Shadows became
substance as lights revealed solid shapes moving toward the jail door.
Atticus remained where he was. The men hid him from view.
He in there, Mr. Finch? a man said.
He is, we heard Atticus answer, and hes asleep. Dont wake him
up.
In obedience to my father, there followed what I later realized was
a sickeningly comic aspect of an unfunny situation: the men talked in
near-whispers.
You know what we want, another man said. Get aside from the
door, Mr. Finch.
You can turn around and go home again, Walter, Atticus said
pleasantly. Heck Tates around somewhere.
The hell he is, said another man. Hecks bunchs so deep in the
woods they wont get out till mornin.
Indeed? Why so?
Called em off on a snipe hunt, was the succinct answer. Didnt
you think athat, Mr. Finch?
Thought about it, but didnt believe it. Well then, my fathers
voice was still the same, that changes things, doesnt it?
It do, another deep voice said. Its owner was a shadow.
Do you really think so?
This was the second time I heard Atticus ask that question in two
days, and it meant somebodys man would get jumped. This was too
good to miss. I broke away from Jem and ran as fast as I could to
Atticus.
Jem shrieked and tried to catch me, but I had a lead on him and
Dill. I pushed my way through dark smelly bodies and burst into the
circle of light.
H-ey, Atticus!
I thought he would have a fine surprise, but his face killed my joy. A
flash of plain fear was going out of his eyes, but returned when Dill and
Jem wriggled into the light.
There was a smell of stale whiskey and pigpen about, and when I
glanced around I discovered that these men were strangers. They were
not the people I saw last night. Hot embarrassment shot through me: I
had leaped triumphantly into a ring of people I had never seen before.
Atticus got up from his chair, but he was moving slowly, like an old
man. He put the newspaper down very carefully, adjusting its creases
with lingering fingers. They were trembling a little.
Go home, Jem, he said. Take Scout and Dill home.
We were accustomed to prompt, if not always cheerful
acquiescence to Atticuss instructions, but from the way he stood Jem
was not thinking of budging.
Go home, I said.
Jem shook his head. As Atticuss fists went to his hips, so did Jems,
and as they faced each other I could see little resemblance between
them: Jems soft brown hair and eyes, his oval face and snug-fitting
ears were our mothers, contrasting oddly with Atticuss graying black
hair and square-cut features, but they were somehow alike. Mutual
defiance made them alike.
Son, I said go home.
Jem shook his head.
Ill send him home,a burly man said, and grabbed Jem roughly
by the collar. He yanked Jem nearly off his feet.
Dont you touch him!I kicked the man swiftly. Barefooted, I was
surprised to see him fall back in real pain. I intended to kickhis shin,
but aimed too high.
Thatll do, Scout.Atticus put his hand on my shoulder. Dont
kick folks. No he said, as I was pleading justification.
Aint nobody gonna do Jem that way, I said.
All right, Mr. Finch, get em outa here, someone growled. You
got fifteen seconds to get em outa here.
In the midst of this strange assembly, Atticus stood trying to make
Jem mind him. I aint going, was his steady answer to Atticuss
threats, requests, and finally, Please Jem, take them home.
I was getting a bit tired of that, but felt Jem had his own reasons for
doing as he did, in view of his prospects once Atticus did get him home.
I looked around the crowd. It was a summers night, but the men were
dressed, most of them, in overalls and denim shirts buttoned up to the
collars. I thought they must be cold-natured, as their sleeves were
unrolled and buttoned at the cuffs. Some wore hats pulled firmly down
over their ears. They were sullen-looking, sleepy-eyed men who seemed
unused to late hours. I sought once more for a familiar face, and at the
center of the semi-circle I found one.
Hey, Mr. Cunningham.
The man did not hear me, it seemed.
Hey, Mr. Cunningham. Hows your entailment gettin along?
Mr. Walter Cunninghams legal affairs were well known to me;
Atticus had once described them at length. The big man blinked and
hooked his thumbs in his overall straps. He seemed uncomfortable; he
cleared his throat and looked away. My friendly overture had fallen flat.
Mr. Cunningham wore no hat, and the top half of his forehead was
white in contrast to his sunscorched face, which led me to believe that
he wore one most days. He shifted his feet, clad in heavy work shoes.
Dont you remember me, Mr. Cunningham? Im Jean Louise
Finch. You brought us some hickory nuts one time, remember? I
began to sense the futility one feels when unacknowledged by a chance
acquaintance.
I go to school with Walter, I began again. Hes your boy, aint he?
Aint he, sir?
Mr. Cunningham was moved to a faint nod. He did know me, after
all.
Hes in my grade, I said, and he does right well. Hes a good
boy, I added, a real nice boy. We brought him home for dinner one
time. Maybe he told you about me, I beat him up one time but he was
real nice about it. Tell him hey for me, wont you?
Atticus had said it was the polite thing to talk to people about what
they were interested in, not about what you were interested in. Mr.
Cunningham displayed no interest in his son, so I tackled his
entailment once more in a last-ditch effort to make him feel at home.
Entailments are bad,I was advising him, when I slowly awoke to
the fact that I was addressing the entire aggregation. The men were all
looking at me, some had their mouths half-open. Atticus had stopped
poking at Jem: they were standing together beside Dill. Their attention
amounted to fascination. Atticuss mouth, even, was half-open, an
attitude he had once described as uncouth. Our eyes met and he shut it.
Well, Atticus, I was just sayin to Mr. Cunningham that
entailments are bad anall that, but you said not to worry, it takes a
long time sometimes... that you alld ride it out together... I was slowly
drying up, wondering what idiocy I had committed. Entailments
seemed all right enough for livingroom talk.
I began to feel sweat gathering at the edges of my hair; I could
stand anything but a bunch of people looking at me. They were quite
still.
Whats the matter? I asked.
Atticus said nothing. I looked around and up at Mr. Cunningham,
whose face was equally impassive. Then he did a peculiar thing. He
squatted down and took me by both shoulders.
Ill tell him you said hey, little lady, he said.
Then he straightened up and waved a big paw. Lets clear out, he
called. Lets get going, boys.
As they had come, in onesand twos the men shuffled back to their
ramshackle cars. Doors slammed, engines coughed, and they were
gone.
I turned to Atticus, but Atticus had gone to the jail and was leaning
against it with his face to the wall. I went to him and pulled his sleeve.
Can we go home now? He nodded, produced his handkerchief, gave
his face a going-over and blew his nose violently.
Mr. Finch?
A soft husky voice came from the darkness above: They gone?
Atticus stepped back and looked up. Theyve gone, he said. Get
some sleep, Tom. They wont bother you any more.
From a different direction, another voice cut crisply through the
night: Youre damn tootin they wont. Had you covered all the time,
Atticus.
Mr. Underwood and a double-barreled shotgun were leaning out
his window above The Maycomb Tribune office.
It was long past my bedtime and I was growing quite tired; it
seemed that Atticus and Mr. Underwood would talk for the rest of the
night, Mr. Underwood out the window and Atticus up at him. Finally
Atticus returned, switched off the light above the jail door, and picked
up his chair.
Can I carry it for you, Mr. Finch? asked Dill. He had not said a
word the whole time.
Why, thank you, son.
Walking toward the office, Dill and I fell into step behind Atticus
and Jem. Dill was encumbered by the chair, and his pace was slower.
Atticus and Jem were well ahead of us, and I assumed that Atticus was
giving him hell for not going home, but I was wrong. As they passed
under a streetlight, Atticus reached out and massaged Jems hair, his
one gesture of affection.
16
Jem heard me. He thrust his head around the connecting door. As
he came to my bed Atticuss light flashed on. We stayed where we were
until it went off; we heard him turn over, and we waited until he was
still again.
Jem took me to his room and put me in bed beside him. Try to go
to sleep, he said, Itll be all over after tomorrow, maybe.
We had come in quietly, so as not to wake Aunty. Atticus killed the
engine in the driveway and coasted to the carhouse; we went in the
back door and to our rooms without a word. I was very tired, and was
drifting into sleep when the memory of Atticus calmly folding his
newspaper and pushing back his hat became Atticus standing in the
middle of an empty waiting street, pushing up his glasses. The full
meaning of the nights events hit me and I began crying. Jem was
awfully nice about it: for once he didnt remind me that people nearly
nine years old didnt do things like that.
Everybodys appetite was delicate this morning, except Jems: he
ate his way through three eggs. Atticus watched in frank admiration;
Aunt Alexandra sipped coffee and radiated waves of disapproval.
Children who slipped out at night were a disgrace to the family. Atticus
said he was right glad his disgraces had come along, but Aunty said,
Nonsense, Mr. Underwood was there all the time.
You know, its a funny thing about Braxton, said Atticus. He
despises Negroes, wont have one near him.
Local opinion held Mr. Underwood to be an intense, profane little
man, whose father in a fey fit of humor christened Braxton Bragg, a
name Mr. Underwood had done his best to live down. Atticus said
naming people after Confederate generals made slow steady drinkers.
Calpurnia was serving Aunt Alexandra more coffee, andshe shook
her head at what I thought was a pleading winning look. Youre still
too little, she said. Ill tell you when you aint. I said it might help my
stomach. All right,she said, and got a cup from the sideboard. She
poured one tablespoonful of coffee into it and filled the cup to the brim
with milk. I thanked her by sticking out my tongue at it, and looked up
to catch Auntys warning frown. But she was frowning at Atticus.
She waited until Calpurnia was in the kitchen, then she said, Dont
talk like that in front of them.
Talk like what in front of whom? he asked.
Like that in front of Calpurnia. You said Braxton Underwood
despises Negroes right in front of her.
Well, Im sure Cal knows it. Everybody in Maycomb knows it.
I was beginningto notice a subtle change in my father these days,
that came out when he talked with Aunt Alexandra. It was a quiet
digging in, never outright irritation. There was a faint starchiness in his
voice when he said, Anything fit to say at the tables fit to say in front
of Calpurnia. She knows what she means to this family.
I dont think its a good habit, Atticus. It encourages them. You
know how they talk among themselves. Every thing that happens in
this towns out to the Quarters before sundown.
My father put down his knife. I dont know of any law that says
they cant talk. Maybe if we didnt give them so much to talk about
theyd be quiet. Why dont you drink your coffee, Scout?
I was playing in it with the spoon. I thought Mr. Cunningham was
a friend of ours. You told me a long time ago he was.
He still is.
But last night he wanted to hurt you.
Atticus placed his fork beside his knife and pushed his plate aside.
Mr. Cunninghams basically a good man, he said, he just has his
blind spots along with the rest of us.
Jem spoke. Dont call that a blind spot. Heda killed you last night
when he first went there.
He might have hurt me a little, Atticus conceded, but son, youll
understand folks a little better when youre older. A mobs always made
up of people, no matter what. Mr. Cunningham was part of a mob last
night, but he was still a man. Every mob in every little Southern town is
always made up of people you knowdoesnt say much for them, does
it?
Ill say not, said Jem.
So it took an eight-year-old child to bring em to their senses,
didnt it? said Atticus. That proves somethingthat a gang of wild
animals can be stopped, simply because theyre still human. Hmp,
maybe we need a police force of children... you children last night made
Walter Cunningham stand in my shoes for a minute. That was enough.
Well, I hoped Jem would understand folks a little better when he
was older; I wouldnt. First day Walter comes back to schoolll be his
last, I affirmed.
You will not touch him, Atticus said flatly. I dont want either of
you bearing a grudge about this thing, no matter what happens.
You see, dont you, said Aunt Alexandra, what comes of things
like this. Dont say I havent told you.
Atticus said hed never say that, pushed out his chair and got up.
Theres a day ahead, so excuse me. Jem, I dont want you and Scout
downtown today, please.
As Atticus departed, Dill came bounding down the hall into the
diningroom. Its all over town this morning, he announced, all about
how we held off a hundred folks with our bare hands....
Aunt Alexandra stared him to silence. It was not a hundred folks,
she said, and nobody held anybody off. It was just a nest of those
Cunninghams, drunk and disorderly.
Aw, Aunty, thats just Dills way, said Jem. He signaled us to
follow him.
You all stay in the yard today, she said, as we made our way to the
front porch.
It was like Saturday. People from the